--- 第 1 页 ---
REVIEW ARTICLE
published: 05 November 2014
doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00218
Mapping epileptic activity: sources or networks for the
clinicians?
Francesca Pittau1, Pierre Mégevand 2, Laurent Sheybani 3, Eugenio Abela4, Frédéric Grouiller 5,
Laurent Spinelli 1, Christoph M. Michel 3, Margitta Seeck 1 and Serge Vulliemoz 1*
1 EEG and Epilepsy Unit, Neurology Department, University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
2 Laboratory for Multimodal Human Brain Mapping, Hofstra North Shore LIJ School of Medicine, Manhasset, NY, USA
3 Functional Brain Mapping Laboratory, Department of Fundamental Neurosciences, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
4 Support Center of Advanced Neuroimaging (SCAN), Institute for Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, University Hospital Inselspital, Bern, Switzerland
5 Radiology Department, University Hospitals and Faculty of Medicine of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Edited by:
Patrick William Carney, The Florey
Institute of Neuroscience and Mental
Health, Australia
Reviewed by:
Mario Alonso, Instituto Nacional de
Neurología y Neurocirugía, Mexico
Christine T. Ekdahl, Lund University,
Sweden
*Correspondence:
Serge Vulliemoz, EEG and Epilepsy
Unit, Neurology Department,
University Hospitals of Geneva, 4 rue
Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil, Geneva 4
1211, Switzerland
e-mail: serge.vulliemoz@hcuge.ch
Epileptic seizures of focal origin are classically considered to arise from a focal epileptogenic
zone and then spread to other brain regions.This is a key concept for semiological electro-
clinical correlations, localization of relevant structural lesions, and selection of patients for
epilepsy surgery. Recent development in neuro-imaging and electro-physiology and combi-
nations, thereof, have been validated as contributory tools for focus localization. In parallel,
these techniques have revealed that widespread networks of brain regions, rather than a
single epileptogenic region, are implicated in focal epileptic activity. Sophisticated multi-
modal imaging and analysis strategies of brain connectivity patterns have been developed
to characterize the spatio-temporal relationships within these networks by combining the
strength of both techniques to optimize spatial and temporal resolution with whole-brain
coverage and directional connectivity. In this paper, we review the potential clinical con-
tribution of these functional mapping techniques as well as invasive electrophysiology in
human beings and animal models for characterizing network connectivity.
Keywords: connectivity, resting-state network, epilepsy, animal model, EEG, fMRI, MEG, intracranial EEG
INTRODUCTION
Epilepsy is one of the most frequent chronic neurological dis-
order, with an incidence of 50/100,000/year and a prevalence of
0.5–1% (1, 2). One third of these patients are drug resistant (3).
Focal seizures are classically considered to be caused by an abnor-
mal neuro-electrical activity of a focal epileptogenic zone and a
subsequent spreading to other brain regions. This concept is inti-
mately linked to the correlation between ictal signs and symptoms,
electro-physiological activity, and structural lesion [anatomo-
electro-clinical correlation (4)]. Furthermore, this hypothesis is
crucial to select drug-resistant focal epilepsy patients for surgery,
a widely accepted effective therapy (5, 6). The aim of epilepsy
surgery is to remove the epileptogenic zone with the preservation
of the eloquent areas (7).
Recent progress in neuro-imaging and electro-physiology sug-
gests that focal seizures and focal epilepsies are actually related
to an abnormal function of a network of cortical and subcorti-
cal brain structures rather than to a single epileptogenic region
(8–14). The occurrence of epileptic activity is due to the abnor-
mal neuronal activity of these connected regions and abnormal
interactions between them (epileptic network). This conceptual
shift is reﬂected in the new terminology proposal for seizures
and epilepsies of the International League against Epilepsy, which
proposes “focal” as indicating seizures arising primarily “within
networks limited to one hemisphere and that may be discrete or
more widely distributed”(15). Generalized seizures are considered
as “originating within and rapidly engaging, bilaterally distrib-
uted networks” of cortical and subcortical regions. Inside these
networks, some brain regions are responsible for seizure initia-
tion and propagation, whereas other nodes are more remotely
involved, their activity modulating, or being modulated by the
epileptic discharge.
There is increasing evidence that epileptic activity strongly
interacts with physiological brain networks, notably the so-called
“resting-state networks” (RSNs) (8, 16). A RSN is a set of brain
regions that shows temporal correlations in their activity (as mea-
sured by hemodynamic or electrical signals) and that are function-
ally related. They are observed during rest but correspond to the
networks revealed in different behavioral and cognitive task (e.g.,
attention, vision, etc.). This has led to the new concept that the
apparently resting spontaneous brain activity shows continuous
interaction among brain networks responsible for various classes
of sensory/behavioral functions (17). RSNs are highly organized in
space, reproducible from subject to subject, and differ with aging
and between genders (18).
In this paper, we review the converging evidence from dif-
ferent brain mapping techniques in human and animal models
that epilepsy is related to the dysfunction of a large-scale brain
networks, with alterations of physiological brain networks. We
will particularly focus on the clinical impact of this new view of
epilepsy as a network disease.
METHODS
An electronic literature search was conducted for articles on this
topic regarding human and animal subjects. Sources searched
included PubMed and relevant books. Words used in the search
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 1


--- 第 2 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
included the text words and subject headings of epilep*,functional
connect*, resting-state functional network*, temporal epilepsy,
extra-temporal epilepsy, electroencephalogram (or EEG), simul-
taneous functional MRI (fMRI) and EEG (or EEG-fMRI), electric
and magnetic source imaging (or MSI, ESI), intracranial EEG (or
iEEG or sEEG), cortico-cortical evoked potential, and single-pulse
electrical stimulation. The words were searched independently and
in combination. For each citation considered,the abstract was read
(when available), and articles were excluded if they were outside
the scope of the review. Studies published only in abstract form,
letters, and technical reports were excluded. The bibliography of
each of the retrieved papers was examined to identify relevant
references that could have been missed by electronic search. The
ﬁndings were described taking into account the limit of words and
the critical insight of the authors.
HOW TO MEASURE RESTING-STATE NETWORKS?
FUNCTIONAL CONNECTIVITY
Functional interactions between brain regions activity, can be
characterized in several ways. On the one hand, functional con-
nectivity (FC), the most widely used metrics,measures the statisti-
cal dependency between different signals obtained by correlation
analysis. However, such strategy does not account for the direc-
tion of the information ﬂow and cannot therefore infer causality
relationships. On the other hand, effective or directed connec-
tivity investigates directional relationships and aims at describ-
ing causal inﬂuences. Effective connectivity can be investigated
using model-driven techniques such as structural equation mod-
eling (19) and dynamic causal modeling (DCM) (20), data-driven
techniques such as Granger-causal modeling (21), or by record-
ing the response of remote areas to focal stimulation of a given
brain region [cortico-cortical evoked potentials (22)]. Connec-
tivity studies can be applied among a set of predeﬁned relevant
brain regions selected by the investigator, between one seed region
and the rest of the brain or at the whole-brain scale, using the
spatial resolution of the recording technique. A detailed descrip-
tion of the various approaches used for measuring connectivity is
beyond the scope of this review and the reader is referred to studies
comparing various approaches to better understand the speciﬁc
limitations of each technique (23–25). The results obtained by
such connectivity analysis between all pairs of brain regions can
be represented in so-called connectivity matrices. Graph topo-
logical analysis is then increasingly applied to reduce the com-
plexity of the data and extract meaningful characteristics of the
networks (26).
BLOOD OXYGEN LEVEL DEPENDENT SIGNAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL
RESTING-STATE NETWORKS
The concept of brain networks originated, and has largely ben-
eﬁted, from the use of resting-state fMRI. fMRI detects blood
oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal change reﬂecting metabol-
ically active brain areas not only in relation to a speciﬁc physiologic
or pathologic event (27) but also in resting-state (RS) condition
(resting-state-fMRI or RS-fMRI).
Biswal and colleagues demonstrated for the ﬁrst time (1995)
that brain regions that are functionally related,show temporal cor-
relations in the low frequency component of the BOLD signal. In
other words, fMRI FC detects zones that exhibit correlated BOLD
ﬂuctuations and,as a result,belong to the same functional network
(28). Studies in monkeys (29) and in human beings (30) suggest
that FC is related to neuronal processes.
Functional connectivity can be measured while the subject is
performing a behavioral and cognitive task (task-related FC), or
while the subject is not performing any speciﬁc task (RS-FC).
The RSN that is mainly activated in condition of resting wake-
fulness and deactivated in task performing is called default-mode
network (DMN) (31). This physiological RSN is involved in self-
referential thoughts and consciousness (32, 33). The concept of
“resting” is debatable. Usually, subjects are instructed to lie down
in the scanner with the eyes closed, and are invited to not sleep.
Different methods have been developed to extract RSNs, some
requiring an “a priori hypothesis,” like seed-based approach (34),
other do not [i.e., independent component analysis (35), or boot-
strap analysis (36)]. The description of the methodological aspects
is outside the scope of this review. Other papers can be consulted
(14, 37, 38).
EEG/MEG AND PHYSIOLOGICAL RESTING-STATE NETWORKS
Functional connectivity algorithms similar to those used for fMRI
BOLD signals can be applied to MEG or EEG current-density
estimations in the source space, revealing brain areas that are syn-
chronized in speciﬁc frequency bands. As with fMRI, such analysis
can be applied to task-related (39), as well as to spontaneous
resting-state activity (40, 41). The unique advantage of EEG/MEG
connectivity analysis is the high temporal resolution that allows
studying fast ﬂuctuations within large-scale network interactions
and fast switches between resting-state networks.
FC analysis of EEG/MEG considers the time-course of electro-
magnetic signals and looks at correlations of oscillating networks
(42). Beyond this view of temporal oscillations, EEG record-
ings can be considered as time-series of scalp potential maps
that vary across time with the temporal resolution in the order
of milliseconds (43). Several studies have shown that sponta-
neous EEG signals can be explained by the alternation of periods
of stable topography, lasting almost 100 ms, very reproducible
across subjects, and modiﬁable by neurological (44) or psychi-
atric impairment (45). These periods are called microstates and
can be identiﬁed throughout an individual’s life (46) suggesting
that they might be mediated by predetermined anatomical con-
nections. During rest, four different microstates are consistently
observed, and they can be considered as “basic building blocks” of
spontaneous mental activities (47). A recent review on this topic
is available (48).
It has been shown (49) that the temporal dynamic of EEG
microstates have hemodynamic correlates that can be measured
with EEG-fMRI and that each physiological microstate map corre-
sponds to one of the well-described BOLD RS network. Such clear
correlates between EEG and BOLD are less well found when look-
ing at classical power ﬂuctuations in speciﬁc EEG frequency bands
(50). This ﬁnding strongly suggests that the EEG microstates can
be the candidates for the electro-physiological signatures of fMRI
RSNs. Scale-invariance of the alternation between microstates has
been demonstrated to be the base of this coupling over such a wide
temporal scale (51).
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 2


--- 第 3 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
EVIDENCE FOR BRAIN NETWORKS INVOLVED IN EPILEPTIC
ACTIVITY
As described above, FC at the whole-brain level can be stud-
ied with EEG, MEG, fMRI, iEEG, or the combination of these
techniques. They have been applied to patients with focal or gen-
eralized epilepsy to characterize spatial and temporal properties of
epileptic networks.
EEG AND MEG-BASED CONNECTIVITY IN EPILEPSY
EEG and MEG are appealing non-invasive techniques for estimat-
ing brain connectivity in epilepsy because they measure neuro-
electrical activity more directly than fMRI and can potentially
offer a higher temporal resolution.
Several studies using concordance with intracranial record-
ings or post-operative outcome have established that electric and
magnetic source imaging (ESI, MSI) are reliable techniques for
estimating the localization of the cortical generators of epileptic
activity (52–55) and these techniques now offer a much more con-
vincing strategy to investigate connectivity directly between the
activity of cortical regions. Therefore, both ESI and MSI studies
will be discussed together hereunder. Studies using connectiv-
ity analysis in the sensor space are not discussed here because
of their severe limitations of interpretation due to important
caveats related to sensor cross-talk, volume conduction, and refer-
ence choice of the electromagnetic signals (56). The projection of
the signal in source space requires the selection of a head model
describing the propagation of the electromagnetic signal (forward
problem) and an inverse solution (estimating the cortical activ-
ity from the EEG/MEG recording, inverse problem) (48, 57, 58).
A variety of head models exists, from template averaged normal
brain to highly sophisticated realistic models based on individual
anatomy, and they have been used in epilepsy imaging and cog-
nitive neurosciences. Validation in patients with invasive EEG or
surgical resection showed that the individual anatomy was impor-
tant for the localization accuracy (54), but that the performance
of highly sophisticated models did not outperform less computer-
intensive models also based on individual anatomy, as these were
disturbed by the presence of brain lesions in patients with epilepsy
(59). Regarding inverse solutions, dipole models consider a sin-
gle or a few equivalent dipole(s) as sources of the EEG/MEG
signals of sources distributed in the whole cortex (48). While
both approaches might yield complimentary results for localiz-
ing epileptic sources (60), distributed sources are best suited to the
studyof connectivitybetweencorticalpatchesatalargebrainscale.
The analysis of interictal epileptic discharges has principally
aimed at localizing epileptic generators in the context of pre-
surgical evaluations rather than studying large brain networks.
Case reports or small MEG series showed promising results for
the localizing value of the regions with high information outﬂow,
estimated by connectivity analysis (61–63). In addition, based on
development in cognitive neurosciences, the background activity
measured by MEG and EEG in the classical frequency bands has
also been used as a substrate to estimate abnormal connectivity
in patients with epilepsy and correlate it with clinical variables.
In patients with brain tumors, increased theta-band connectiv-
ity and more profound network alterations were associated with
a higher number of epileptic seizures (64) and there is higher
post-operative network improvement in patients who become
seizure free (65).
In generalized epilepsies, connectivity studies have highlighted
a network of hyperconnected anterior regions in photosensitive
patients (66). Network analysis using graph theory in ﬁve patients
with absence epilepsy showed a build-up of connectivity changes
occurring before the onset of generalized spike-wave discharges
(67). This shows the potential of such a technique for our under-
standing of the large-scale brain networks underlying hyperex-
citability and interictal to ictal transition. A similar approach has
been applied to iEEG recordings of interictal to ictal transition in
patients with focal cortical dysplasia (12).
Another study used co-occurrence of MEG interictal spikes
to build graphs of connectivity between the estimated sources of
these spikes. In seven patients also investigated with stereotac-
tic iEEG, the connections revealed by MEG were conﬁrmed by
iEEG (68).
Similarly to fMRI studies, future work will need to distinguish
between transient connectivity alterations related to interictal dis-
charges, that are known to be associated with subtle cognitive
impairment (69), and deeper connectivity changes based on back-
ground activity alterations. The tools are now available to beneﬁt
from the high temporal resolution of EEG/MEG to further inves-
tigate these issues and this ﬁeld has recently attracted an intense
interest. While MEG offers advantages over EEG for longitudi-
nal studies of post-operative cases, due to its insensitivity to skull
defects, the development of long-term high-density EEG system,
its greater versatility compared to MEG and its potential com-
bination with fMRI will be precious for recording seizures and
exploring network changes leading to their initiation, spread, and
termination.
EEG-fMRI CONNECTIVITY IN EPILEPSY
Simultaneous EEG and fMRI (EEG-fMRI) detects hemodynamic
changes in the brain related to events of interest identiﬁed in
the EEG (70). Combining high temporal resolution of EEG sig-
nal with high spatial resolution of BOLD images, EEG-fMRI has
been shown to be useful to characterize various forms of focal
and generalized epileptic abnormalities (hereunder called“spikes”
for practical reasons) (71). EEG-fMRI helps to localize epileptic
focus in patients with drug-resistant focal epilepsy candidate for
surgery (72, 73). From the ﬁrst publications (74, 75), EEG-fMRI
has demonstrated that BOLD responses to a focal spike can be
multifocal, also present at a distance from the presumed focus
(Figure 1), corroborating the concept of epileptic network (9).
Studying such networks can inform about patients’prognosis after
surgery. While focal responses predict a good post-operative out-
come, diffuse results are associated with a poor outcome, probably
reﬂecting that a larger network is involved in the epileptogenic
zone (76, 77). Epileptic activity can also be detected in the absence
of spikes and fMRI analysis based on EEG topography can reveal
epileptogenic networks (78).
BOLD responses to a neural event are usually detected with
a delay of 4–6 s (79). Nevertheless, hemodynamic changes to
spikes can have different peak times (80), and can occur before
the spike is visible on the scalp (81). Dynamic analysis of BOLD
response (82, 83) can tell us which brain areas are ﬁrst activated,
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 3


--- 第 4 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
FIGURE 1 | Interictal network revealed by EEG-fMRI. Patients with
non-lesional right frontal epilepsy. Marked events inside the EEG-fMRI
session: right frontal spikes with phase reversal at F4 (on the left:
longitudinal bipolar montage from 204 channels EEG). On the middle:
scalp voltage map of the spike (204 electrodes, viewed from the top)
with the maximal right frontal negativity (blue). BOLD response
(t-value = 4; p < 0.05 corrected for family-wise-error) has maximal
activation in the spike topography but other clusters with inferior
statistical values are present in the contra-lateral homologous region and
in the thalamus.
by comparing early BOLD response vs. late BOLD response. How-
ever, this analysis does not address the concept of causality and the
sluggishness and variability of BOLD responses prevent a more
accurate investigationinto the temporal dynamics and directional-
ity of the connections (24). Causality within epileptic network can
be addressed by effective connectivity approaches like Dynamic
Causal Modeling (DCM) (37, 84).
The combination of ESI with EEG-fMRI can offer complemen-
tary information for improving each single technique (Figure 2).
Although EEG-fMRI and ESI measure different signals (hemody-
namic the ﬁrst, electrical the second), the concordance between
ESI performed during fMRI recordings can allow distinguishing
between hemodynamic changes related to spike onset vs. propaga-
tion, adding important temporal information to the limited fMRI
temporal resolution (85, 86).
EEG-fMRI studies can give insights about epileptogenesis.
Interictal spikes of different types of epilepsy (frontal, temporal,
and posterior quadrant), are associated with deactivation in the
precuneus and posterior cingulate cortex (10), regions involved in
the DMN (Figure 3). Other physiological RSNs could be affected
by spikes: this interaction and its clinical consequences need to be
clariﬁed in future studies. A common involvement of the cingulate
gyri in temporal lobe and frontal lobe epilepsy was reported (10),
probably resulting from rapid spread of epileptic activity originat-
ing from the temporal and frontal areas, which both involve the
limbic system.
FIGURE 2 |Techniques using different types of signal are concordant in
localizing the epileptic focus in a patient with right orbito-frontal focal
cortical dysplasia. On the top-line: ESI (256 electrodes, simpliﬁed realistic
head model lSMAC, distributed inverse solution LORETA) performed on
right frontal spikes (FP2-F8). On the bottom-line: EEG-fMRI performed on
the same type of events recorded inside the scanner.
A speciﬁc area, localized in the medial orbito-frontal gyrus
(piriform cortex), called “area tempestas”, seems to be involved
in the genesis or propagation of epileptic activity (87, 88) in focal
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 4


--- 第 5 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
FIGURE 3 | Interictal involvement of DMN in focal epilepsy. Patients
with right hemispheric extended periventricular nodular heterotopia.
Marked epileptic events inside the scanner: right posterior temporal spikes
with phase reversal at P8 (on the left: 256 channel EEG; referential montage
Fz-Cz). BOLD increase is concordant with the spike topography
(topographic map on the middle), whereas BOLD decrease is present in the
regions of default-mode network (DMN).
epilepsies. A DCM study supported the hypothesis of a causal link
between hemodynamic changes in this structure and a speciﬁc
type of reﬂex epilepsy, although in a single patient (89). Sev-
eral other ﬁndings seem to corroborate the important role of the
area tempestas: (i) its decrease in benzodiazepine receptor (87),
(ii) its epileptogenic role in animal kindling models of temporal
lobe epilepsy (TLE) (90–92), and (iii) its increase in gray matter
volume in patient with frontal lobe epilepsy when compared to
controls (93).
From a methodological point of view,multimodal combination
between EEG/ESI, fMRI, and diffusion imaging tractography will
allow exploring functional and structural connectivity at a ﬁner
spatio-temporal scale. Some initial small studies have highlighted
the potential of these combinations (94–96).
fMRI and EEG-fMRI studies in focal epilepsy
Unfortunately, only few of the many studies on RS-FC have been
done with the simultaneous recording of EEG. Spikes cause a tran-
sient cognitive impairment, by affecting, e.g., memory retrieval in
rats (97),and memory maintenance and retrieval in human beings
(69). Therefore, a more consistent use of simultaneous EEG while
performingfMRIforRSortask-relatedstudiesinepilepticpatients
is needed to determine the inﬂuence of spikes on the determined
BOLD networks. Indeed a study where EEG activity was moni-
tored during a working memory-fMRI session (98) has shown that
the task-related BOLD dramatically changes when spikes occur.
Another advantage of the simultaneous recording of EEG in the
scanner is that it allows monitoring the transition between differ-
ent alertness states in order to assure that the subject is in RS and
not in drowsiness/sleep state. A very recent review (99) has accu-
rately discussed this issue and summarized the relevant studies.
Temporal lobe epilepsy. The majority of RS-fMRI studies in focal
epilepsieshavefocusedonTLE,whichisthemostcommonformof
focal epilepsy in adults and offers the advantage of being one of the
most homogeneous groups within the focal epilepsy syndromes.
Temporal lobe epilepsy has been the ﬁrst epileptic syndrome to
be considered as epileptogenic network (100) with relatively well
characterized components encompassing different structures in
the mesial temporal lobe (amygdala and hippocampus), adjacent
cortex including enthorhinal cortex and lateral temporal cortex,
and extra-temporal structures (i.e., thalamus and orbito-frontal
cortex). fMRI connectivity studies (some with simultaneous EEG
recording, others without) conducted by seeding the principal
nodes of the mesial temporal network showed impaired connec-
tivity with the other nodes of the network (101–103). Decreased
connectivity is the most common ﬁnding among those studies.
Nevertheless, there are reports of increased function of the unaf-
fected hippocampus in patients with unilateral MTLE, both in the
RS (104) and during task-related (105, 106) acquisitions. Mor-
gan et al. (107) have shown that RS cross-hippocampal FC is
disrupted at the beginning of the disease and then increases lin-
early with epilepsy duration after 10 years, suggesting that length
of disease inﬂuences FC patterns. Bettus et al. (108) studied the
electro-physiological correlates of BOLD signal ﬂuctuations in
structures exhibiting epileptiform discharges, by measuring cor-
relations between intracerebral EEG and resting-state fMRI in ﬁve
patients with TLE. They found an increase in connectivity mea-
sured from the intracerebral EEG but a decrease of connectivity
measured from the BOLD signal in regions with epileptiform
abnormalities relative to non-affected areas. This discrepancy,
obtained by measuring connectivity of two signals of different
nature (electrical and hemodynamic), demonstrates the challenge
in interpreting connectivity changes. It could also suggest an
alteration of neurovascular coupling in TLE.
In unilateral mesial TLE (MTLE), the affected amygdala and
hippocampus (and to a lesser extent on the contra-lateral side)
are less connected between them and also with other consis-
tent RSNs, such as the mesolimbic and the DMN, suggesting
that these functional interictal changes explain cognitive and psy-
chiatric impairments often found in patients with this type of
epilepsy (109). Several fMRI studies, with and without EEG, have
shown an abnormal FC between physiological consistent RSNs
[i.e., language (110)] and MTL structures.
Default-mode network.
Laufs and colleagues (8) have shown that
deactivation in DMN, involved in consciousness, is more frequent
for spikes in patients with TLE than extra-TLE. Deactivation in
the same regions in response to temporal spikes was also demon-
strated by Kobayashi et al. (111) and by Fahoum et al. (10). Frings
et al. (112) showed decreased DMN-hippocampus FC in MTLE
patients compared to controls during an object-location memory
task, underlying the importance of the intact connection between
these structures to preserve memory. This concept was validated in
post-surgical follow-up studies (see below). An impairment of the
connections between DMN and MTL structures has been demon-
strated also in RS with a seed-based fMRI analysis (113). The same
group (114) combined fMRI RS-FC and diffusion tensor imaging,
andshowedthatthedecreasedFCwithintheDMNinMTLEiscor-
related to abnormal structural connectivity. Although functional
DMN connectivity is generally decreased in MTLE, few nodes can
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 5


--- 第 6 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
be hyperconnected and this may play a compensatory role for the
loss of functional connections in other regions of the network
(115). The same study, performed with an independent compo-
nent analysis, has also shown distinct patterns of FC impairment
with DMN between the left and right MTLE. The same difference
has been further reported (116), suggesting that impaired cogni-
tion and memory in TLE may be different in right vs. left TLE.
Morgan and colleagues (117) have identiﬁed a region in the ven-
tral lateral nucleus of the right thalamus whose connectivity to the
hippocampi separates left from right TLE subjects, suggesting that
quantifying resting-state FC across this network may be a potential
indicator of lateralization of TLE (useful step in the pre-surgical
assessments).
Functional connectivity ﬁndings are related with clinical data:
McCormick et al. (118) shows that MTLE patients with respect
to controls have reduced connectivity from the posterior DMN to
the epileptogenic hippocampus and increased DMN connectivity
to the contra-lateral hippocampus. Stronger DMN connectivity
to the epileptogenic hippocampus was associated with better pre-
surgical memory and with greater postsurgical memory decline,
whereas stronger DMN connectivity to the contra-lateral hip-
pocampus was associated with less postsurgical memory decline.
Followingsurgery,DMNconnectivitytotheremaininghippocam-
pus increased from pre-surgical values and showed enhanced
correlation with postsurgical memory function.
Hippocampi are considered by some authors as nodes of the
DMN (119), but there is not unanimity on this interpretation (32,
120, 121). It is important to remember that all the regions of the
brain can be functionally connected: a region belonging to a spe-
ciﬁc network (like the mesial temporal network) can belong also
to a less speciﬁc network encompassing the previous one. This
classiﬁcation depends on how many different physiological RSNs
are extracted from speciﬁc analyses: for instance, by extracting
four physiological RSNs, the probability that the mesial temporal
regions will be included in the DMN is higher than if the number
of extracted network is higher (122).
Mesolimbic network.
Patients with unilateral MTLE have impor-
tant decreases of FC with the ventromesial limbic prefrontal
regions and with the nucleus accumbens (109). These regions
belong to a dopaminergic mesolimbic network, involved in long-
term memory for novel events and reward (123). Hippocampus
and amygdala have been often described as part of this net-
work (124, 125), and several ﬁndings suggest that this network
is affected in MTLE. The preferential seizure spread from mesial
temporal lobes to mesial frontal lobes,especially the orbito-frontal
cortex, has been demonstrated by ictal iEEG in patients with
MTLE, suggesting that mesial orbito-frontal cortex is strongly
affected by mesial temporal activity (126). On the other hand,
dopaminergic alterations have been demonstrated in the patho-
physiology of major depression, and dysfunctional activity of the
mesolimbic dopaminergic system plays a crucial role in depres-
sive behavior (127, 128). Structures belonging to mesolimbic
network are functionally (129) and structurally (130) impaired
in MTLE patients who have psychiatric impairments, such as
anxiety/depression. A recent study (131) showed that the sub-
genual anterior cingulate cortex (mesolimbic network key-node)
is affected only in MTLE patients that have primary affective dis-
orders and not in those without such disorders and neither in
controls. The same study conﬁrms these FC ﬁndings with voxel-
based morphometry and diffusion tensor imaging, corroborating
the concept that the affective psychopathology often diagnosed
in patients with MTLE has a neurobiological correlate. Antide-
pressant drugs, when effective, could modulate these connectivity
impairments.
The amygdala has often been described as part of mesolimbic
network and it is also involved in emotional processing of stimuli.
Facial emotion recognition, particularly for “fear,” is impaired in
patients with TLE, especially on the right hemisphere (132–135).
Broicher and colleagues (136) showed through fearful-face fMRI-
paradigm that the altered amygdala FC in TLE patients is strongly
related to the poor performance in behavioral tests evaluating the
theory of mind abilities (ability of decoding thoughts and behavior
of other human beings). Another study with the same paradigm
showed that, in right TLE patients, pre-operative right amygdala
activation correlates with post-operative change of anxiety and
depression scores [i.e., greater increases in anxiety and depression
in patients with greater preoperative activation (137)]. This con-
ﬁrms that pre-surgical study of FC between TLE and other brain
structures can help to predict post-surgery neuropsychological
consequences.
Attention network.
Several studies have shown that dorsal and
ventral attention networks are functionally altered in MTLE,
explaining why patients with this type of epilepsy have often
worse performances than healthy controls (HC) in attention tasks.
Cataldi et al. (138) have recently reviewed this topic.
Extra-temporal lobe epilepsy.
Extra-temporal lobe epilepsies
are characterized by a wide range of focus localization and eti-
ology. For this reason, group studies with homogeneous clini-
cal phenotype are difﬁcult to achieve. This contrasts with the
large body of group studies in MTLE, which take advantage
from the frequent uniform pathology of atrophy and cell-loss in
amygdala-hippocampus structures. A group-analysis EEG-fMRI
study in different types of epilepsy (frontal, temporal, and pos-
terior quadrant) showed that focal spikes are associated with
networks of widespread metabolic changes, speciﬁc for each type
of epilepsy (10).
Negishi et al. (139) revealed higher lateral pre-surgery FC maps
indrug-resistantpatientswithgoodsurgicaloutcome(seizure-free
at 1-year) compared to those with poor outcome. A recent study
on 23 patients with frontal lobe epilepsy used the same seed-FC
approach (seed at maximal BOLD value of the spike-related acti-
vation map) (140),ﬁnding an increased FC in the neighborhood of
the seed and a decrease in regions remote to the seed compared to
controls.Patient-speciﬁcconnectivitypatternwasnotsigniﬁcantly
changed when comparing fMRI runs with spikes vs. fMRI without
any spike detectable on the simultaneous EEG. Patients with drug-
resistant frontal lobe epilepsy (141) recruit wider areas compared
to controls when performing an fMRI memory encoding task par-
adigm, particularly in the contra-lateral frontal lobe, suggesting
the presence of compensatory mechanisms to maintain memory
function.
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 6


--- 第 7 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
Generalized epilepsy
Different theories have been proposed about the patho-physiology
of “generalized seizures”. Meeren et al. (142) reviewed this topic.
All these theories consider cortex and thalamus as being involved
in the generation of the typical 2.5–4 Hz generalized spike-wave
discharges (GSWD) detected on scalp EEG, but it is still unclear,
which of them is the“primum movens”(143). As discussed below,
animal studies in genetic models of absence epilepsy are crucial
to gain understanding of these conditions because no invasive
validation can be contemplated in human beings. These animal
studies suggest that GSWDs are triggered in a restricted cortical
region (144–147).
Several EEG-fMRI studies showed that during short GSWD
(16, 148–150) and absence (151–154), there is a characteristic pat-
tern of subcortical (medio-dorsal thalamic and striatus) activation
and cortical deactivation, especially in areas of the DMN. It has
been hypothesized that the DMN deactivation is linked to reduced
consciousness (i.e., absences) (16, 155, 156). A dynamic analysis
study on 17 absences from nine patients with absence epilepsy
and classical pattern of 3–4 Hz GSWDs (83) showed that BOLD
responses were remarkably consistent in space and time across dif-
ferent absences of one patient, but were different from patient to
patient. Furthermore, this study shows early frontal BOLD acti-
vations (speciﬁc for each patient), supporting the cortical focus
theory. Another EEG-fMRI study on 11 children with absence
seizures (157) revealed that the ﬁrst brain zone showing BOLD
increase was the parietal cortex, this activity starting 10 s before
the onset of the discharge. Additionally, this study demonstrated
thehemodynamic involvement of subcortical structures in GSWD,
including the reticular structures of the brainstem. Focal cortical
involvement before the onset of GSWD has been demonstrated
also by a magnetoencephalography study in human beings (158)
and a near-infrared spectroscopy study applied on the frontal
cortex (159). An exhaustive review on focal abnormalities in idio-
pathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) has been recently published
(160). All these ﬁndings support the conceptual transition from
“primarily generalized epilepsy,” (implying that all brain regions
simultaneously would generate GSWD) to seizures “originating
within and rapidly engaging, bilaterally distributed networks” of
cortical and subcortical regions (15).
Concerning the role of subcortical structures, in patients
with IGE, it has been shown that both the anterior nucleus of
thalamus (ANT) and the centromedian/parafascicular (Cm/Pf)
nucleus (which provides diffuse inputs to the cortex) are acti-
vated during GSWD; the activity of the cortico-reticular Cm/Pf
preceded that of the ANT, suggesting that the Cm/Pf is involved
in GSWD initiation or early propagation, while the ANT in its
maintenance (161).
Recent studies have used fMRI to investigate whether resting-
state FC between thalamus,basal ganglia,and DMN areas is altered
in patients with IGE, even during GSWD-free periods of brain
activity (Figure 4). Wang et al. (162) used ICA to map RSNs
in 16 patients with IGE and 16 HC. They found that the DMN
had simultaneously reduced FC within the anterior cingulate
cortex,butincreasedconnectivityintheprecuneus.Moreover,they
found widespread connectivity reductions in prefrontal, sensori-
motor, and even auditory cortices (162). Reduced resting-state FC
FIGURE 4 |This diagram summarizes the functional connectivity (FC)
changes in patients with idiopathic generalized epilepsy compared to
healthy controls. The color map shows the default-mode network
(z-scores) derived from independent component analysis or RS-fMRI data
overlaid on a standard single-subject anatomy (Montreal Neurological
Institute space). Widespread FC reductions were found within the DMN
(dashed lines), as well as between anterior DMN and the thalamus.
Increased FC related to increased disease duration has been observed
between posterior DMN regions and the parahippocampal gyrus (solid line).
ACC, anterior cingulate cortex, IPL, inferior parietal lobule, PRE, precuneus,
PHG, parahippocampal gyrus, TH, thalamus.
between frontal areas and the rest of the DMN was later conﬁrmed
(163). An important question is whether these changes in DMN
connectivity are meaningfully related to clinical information, e.g.,
disease duration or responsiveness to medication. Of note, in
both aforementioned studies, there were signiﬁcant correlations
between RS-FC and disease duration: the reduction in connec-
tivity was inversely correlated to disease duration, indicating that
long-standing epilepsy leads to progressive disruption of DMN
integration. Interestingly, a study of structural and FC in 26 IGE
patients and HC, showed that the degree of coupling between
functional and structural connectivity networks is decreased,
and exhibited a negative correlation with epilepsy duration in
patients (164).
Other RSNs can be affected in patients with IGE, reﬂect-
ing speciﬁc cognitive impairment when compared to controls.
A seed-based RS-FC study in 14 patients with IGE showed that
attention network is impaired even in interictal periods, and that
this impairment is related with the disease duration (165).
One study in 60 IGE patients speciﬁcally addressed the question
whether pharmacoresistance was correlated with RS-FC changes
in the DMN (166). DMN connectivity was reduced in the IGE
group compared to HC, and the strongest decrease was found
in those patients that were resistant to valproate. Finally, a recent
study directly addressed RS-FC within the thalamo-cortical system
(167), ﬁnding decreased RS-FC between thalamus and anterior
DMN. Collectively, these studies suggest that there is a loss of
functional integration in the thalamocortical and default-mode
system of the brain in IGE, even outside the GSWD. Although
small sample size and heterogeneous methodology limit “gen-
eralization,” the abnormal RS-FC patterns found in IGE so far
could serve as endophenotypes of different IGE syndromes, and
thus inform clinical diagnostics. Importantly, the confounding
effect of anti-epileptic drug on dysconnectivity needs to be further
elucidated.
ThemostfrequentIGEsyndromeisjuvenilemyoclonicepilepsy
(JME), where seizures are characterized by myoclonic jerks of
the upper limbs, often triggered by cognitive inputs. Several RS
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 7


--- 第 8 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
and task-related functional studies have shown an impairment
of connectivity among supplementary motor area and the rest
of the brain (168–170), suggesting that this structure may rep-
resent the anatomic basis for triggering motor seizures in JME.
JME patients have often personality characteristics suggestive of
a frontal lobe dysfunction (e.g., risk-taking behavior, dysexecu-
tive syndrome). A task-related FC study in JME patients (171)
shows that patients with ongoing seizures learn less from previous
experiences compared to seizure-free patients and to controls.
Pediatric syndromes
Numerous EEG-fMRI studies have been conducted on pedi-
atric syndromes [for review, see in Ref. (172)]. Several studies
in Lennox–Gastaut syndrome (173–175) have shown hemody-
namic involvement of brainstem, thalamus, and basal ganglia dur-
ing paroxysmal fast activity and slow spike-and-wave discharges,
underlying the importance of cortical–subcortical networks in
Lennox–Gastaut syndrome. A group-analysis study in patients
with myoclonic-astatic-epilepsy (176) showed that GSWD are
related not only to a thalamo-cortical network (commonly found
in IGE), but also to brain areas associated with motor function,
suggesting that the involvement of these structures may predispose
to the typical myoclonic jerks observed in this syndrome.
Concerningidiopathic focalepilepsiesof childhood,thesecom-
prise a broad spectrum of phenotypes showing an overlap with
each other, from benign childhood epilepsy with centro-temporal
spikes (BECTS) to more severe seizure and cognitive disorders,like
atypical benign partial epilepsy (ABPE), continuous spikes and
waves during slow sleep (CSWS), and Landau-Kleffner syndrome.
In patients with BECTS, EEG-fMRI studies have revealed focal
spike-associated BOLD signal changes in the sensorimotor cor-
tex, well corresponding to spikes localization, and typical seizure
semiology (177–180). In patients with CSWS, a consistent neu-
ronal network including both cortical and subcortical structures
was described with positive BOLD signal changes in the perisyl-
vian region, insula, cingulated cortex, and thalamus, and negative
BOLD signal changes in the DMN areas and caudate nucleus
(181). Source analysis of the simultaneously recorded EEG in
these patients allowed differentiating initiation from propagation
of epileptic activity in these common networks. The importance
of assessing sleep state when studying networks is given by the
report of a patient, whose centro-temporal spikes were recorded
during wakefulness and sleep. BOLD response during wakefulness
showed a focal activation concordant with the spike topography,
whereas BOLD response to the same event during sleep showed
the involvement of a thalamic–perisylvian neural network similar
to the one previously observed in patients with CSWS, suggesting
a common sleep-related network dysfunction even in cases with
milder phenotypes (182).
A single-subject and group-analysis study (183) on patients
with ABPE demonstrated that this syndrome is characterized by
patterns similar to studies in rolandic epilepsy (focal BOLD sig-
nal changes in the spike ﬁeld) as well as patterns observed in
CSWS (distant BOLD signal changes in cortical and subcortical
structures), thereby corroborating the concept that idiopathic
focal epilepsies of childhood form a spectrum of overlapping
syndromes.
An EEG-fMRI study in thirteen patients with ring 20 chro-
mosome syndrome (184) shows speciﬁc networks involved by
different interictal and ictal events of interest,suggesting that some
hemodynamic networks are the expression of epilepsy-related
cognitive and behavioral deﬁcits typical of ring 20 chromosome
syndrome, whereas others can be common to other syndromes
with neurobehavioral regression.
INTRACRANIAL EEG STUDIES
The indication for video-iEEG monitoring is the absence of a
unique focal hypothesis regarding the source of the patient’s
seizures (obtained with non-invasive investigation), or the need
for cortical mapping of the epileptogenic cortex vs. eloquent cor-
tex (7). Therefore, intracranial electrodes often sample from more
than one lobe,although their spatial sampling remains limited and
needs to be targeted using all available clinical and paraclinical
information. Subdural grids allow dense sampling of the corti-
cal convexity while intracerebral depth electrodes are able to reach
deeper structures (e.g.,medial temporal structures); combinations
of both techniques are feasible. Therefore, iEEG studies represent
a unique opportunity to investigate seizure networks in human
beings with optimal temporal and excellent spatial resolution.
The concept of the seizure-onset zone as a single,circumscribed
brain region implies that, assuming that intracranial electrodes
sample this region,ictal iEEG activity should invariably start there.
Careful observation of ictal iEEG recordings, however, reveals that
this is not always the case. Rather, there are patients in whom
clinically indistinguishable seizures seem to start at any of two or
more distinct brain areas (100). Observations such as this were one
of the major factors spurring the interest in considering seizure-
generating brain regions as distributed networks. Therefore, the
seizure-onset zone could be seen as the particular regions with the
lowest seizure threshold while other regions could also give rise to
independent seizure onsets, which explains the need to consider
more than the sole seizure-onset zone for estimating the epilepto-
genic zone. In an attempt to quantitatively analyze seizure-onset
patterns, Bartolomei and colleagues (185) developed the epilepto-
genicity index (EI),which takes into account the transition of iEEG
activity toward higher frequencies (a general observation of ictal
iEEG patterns) together with the delay in which the transition is
observed compared to the ictal onset. This approach has revealed
that in a signiﬁcant portion of TLE patients, the medial and lateral
temporal lobe display similar EI, implying that both structures
could equally subtend seizure generation. Also of interest, some
patients with what seemed like TLE before implantation actually
displayed the highest values of EI in the fronto-orbital, opercular,
or insular cortex rather than the temporal lobe, and these patients
had poorer outcomes after resective surgery, suggesting that they
harbored more distributed seizure-generating networks not easily
amenable to full resection (186). The number of brain regions with
a high EI increases with the duration of epilepsy, suggesting that
epilepsy networks may extend over time as a result of plasticity
triggered by pathological activity (185, 186).
The same authors analyzed the neurophysiological correlates
of alterations of consciousness in TLE (187). They found that
alteration of consciousness was associated with increased broad-
band synchronization in a network of structures, which were
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 8


--- 第 9 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
mainly extra-temporal, including the thalamus, cingulate cortex,
and parieto-temporal association cortex. Consciousness was pre-
served as long as excessive synchrony was conﬁned to the temporal
lobe.Similarly,lossof consciousnessinparietalseizureswasassoci-
ated with widespread parietal and frontal synchronization (188).
The authors framed these observations into the context of the
global workspace theory, in which the sustained synchronization
of neuronal activity in widely distributed modules renders percep-
tions, memories, and intentions available to consciousness (189).
This work rejoins observations made with single photon emis-
sion computed tomography that temporal lobe seizures causing
altered consciousness were associated with widespread cortical
and subcortical blood-ﬂow alterations (190). That group later
showed increases in the power of delta oscillations in the frontal
and parietal association cortices during seizure-related loss of con-
sciousness (191). Results from studies in a rat model of complex
partialseizuressuggestthatthesewidespreadchangesarecausedby
transientalterationof activityinthesubcorticalseptalnuclei(192),
implying that the widespread effects of temporal lobe seizures on
cortical networks could be mediated indirectly via the midline
arousal structures (193).
Measures of directed connectivity in seizure networks are start-
ing to reveal the internal organization of the individual nodes that
make up the network. To date, most iEEG studies use mathemat-
ical approaches to determine the direction of connections. For
instance, using focal cortical dysplasia as a model of a circum-
scribed seizure-onset zone and applying partial directed coherence
analysis, Varotto et al. (12) found that the focal dysplasia indeed
acted as the initial generator of ictal activity, as evidenced by its
greater out-degree both interictally, pre-ictally, and during ictal
onsets [the out-degree is a summary measure of the inﬂuence of
one network node on all the others (194)]. Cortical-areas remote
from the morphological lesion could also be involved in the onset
orearlypropagationof ictalhigh-frequencyactivityandcouldthus
represent secondary foci. Wilke et al. (195) used frequency-band-
speciﬁc betweenness centrality, a graph theoretical measure of the
“importance”of a node in network pathways,to demonstrate a sig-
niﬁcant overlap between the intracranial electrodes showing the
highest betweenness centrality and the seizure-onset zone delin-
eated visually by clinical neurophysiologists, as well as the resected
cortical area. That correspondence was present both during ictal
and interictal recordings and was highest for gamma-band fre-
quencies. In addition, the analysis also revealed nodes with high
betweenness centrality that had not been clinically identiﬁed as
part of the seizure-onset zone. Van Mierlo et al. (196) showed
that the single intracranial electrode with the highest out-degree
during seizure onsets was included in the clinically deﬁned seizure-
onset zone as well as the resection area in all of eight patients.
These ﬁrst ﬁndings suggest that analyzing epileptic networks in
the framework of graph theory, taking into account the direction
of connections between nodes in the network, can help clinicians
delineate the primary drivers from secondary nodes in seizure
nodes [see also in Ref. (197) for a review]. In the near future, we
expect that the tools of graph theory will be applied more generally
to iEEG data to describe more fully the spatio-temporal dynamics
of seizure networks. Another unique perspective could be offered
by the analysis of simultaneous recordings of iEEG and fMRI (198,
199)tocombinethespatialresolutionof iEEGwiththemappingof
whole-brain BOLD changes related to epileptic activity. This could
allow bridging the poorly understood gap between increased iEEG
connectivity and reduced BOLD connectivity within epileptic
networks (108).
Micro-electrode studies in human beings
Another potential breakthrough in the investigation of epileptic
networks could stem, in a somewhat paradoxical fashion, from
micro-electrode array recordings, which revealed new insights on
the pathophysiology of epilepsy. Schevon et al. (200) inserted
arrays comprising of 96 electrodes arranged in a 4-by-4-mm
square pattern in the putative seizure-onset zone allowing to
record single unit activity in cortical layers 4 and 5 as well as
recording the local-ﬁeld potentials. They showed that there is a
sharp delineation (at a sub-millimetric scale) between cortical-
areas involved in intense hypersynchronous ﬁring (the hallmark of
ictal activity,based on animal studies) and adjacent areas with only
mildlyincreasedﬁringrateandsynchrony.Crucially,visualinspec-
tion of the iEEG alone did not allow distinguishing between what
theauthorstermedtheseizurecoreandits(presumably)inhibitory
penumbra. The same investigators further proposed that ictal
high-frequency oscillations phase-locked to the lower-frequency,
high-amplitude ictal iEEG recorded by standard intracranial elec-
trodes might represent a signature of increased ﬁring in the seizure
core (201). These new ﬁndings open the possibility of investigating
neuronal ﬁring in distributed seizure networks using conventional
iEEG electrodes, without the need for micro-electrode arrays.
Future work building on these exciting ﬁndings will likely increase
our understanding of the ways in which seizures alter normal
neuronal ﬁring across the nodes of the involved networks.
Direct electrical stimulation studies
Direct electrical stimulation (DES) in epileptic patients consists
of administering electrical currents to the brain tissue in order to
transiently inﬂuence or perturb its function. A technique almost
as old as epilepsy surgery, it has mostly been used to probe the
function of the cortex directly underlying or surrounding the stim-
ulation site (202–205). In that context,DES is generally delivered at
high frequencies (e.g., 50–60 Hz) for a few seconds with the aim of
inducing clinical changes in the patient (206). More recently, DES
has also been used to investigate FC; in that case,single stimulation
pulses are delivered at low frequencies (e.g., 1 Hz) and the readout
consists of time-locked perturbations in the activity of points dis-
tant from the stimulation site (cortico-cortical evoked potentials,
CCEPs) (207). An interesting aspect of DES-based FC assessments
is that they are directed, i.e., the effect of stimulation at site A on
site B is not necessarily symmetrical with the effect of stimulating
B on A (Figure 5). There is an intuitive appeal to this “hands-on”
interventional approach to reveal directional connectivity. Evoked
effective connectivity was found to correlate with FC measured
by resting-state fMRI (22) as well as with anatomical connectiv-
ity probed by diffusion tensor imaging (208). It has been pointed
out, however, that DES can activate axons in the antidromic as
well as the orthodromic direction, and could also stimulate ﬁbers
de passage, an important caveat to keep in mind when interpret-
ing the directionality information provided by these data (209).
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 9


--- 第 10 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
FIGURE 5 | Evoked effective connectivity reveals the directionality of
neural connections in the human brain. In this example, subdural
electrodes are represented by circles, and CCEP responses as lines linking
bipolar electrode pairs. Missing (e.g., artifacted) data are indicated by light
gray lines, sub-threshold (non-signiﬁcant) responses by black lines, and
signiﬁcant responses by progressively lighter shades of blue.
(A) Stimulation of the middle frontal gyrus (electrode pair colored in pink)
triggers widespread responses in the frontal and temporal lobes, including
the middle temporal gyrus (inset: CCEP waveform from 50 ms before to
250 ms after stimulation; the arrow indicates the time of stimulation). By
contrast, stimulation of the middle temporal gyrus (B) does not evoke any
signiﬁcant response in the frontal lobe, illustrating that effective
connectivity between remote brain structures is not necessarily reciprocal.
This highlights the importance of aiming at obtaining multimodal
functional and structural information to better understand brain
connectivity and dynamics.
Evoked effective connectivity has revealed strong intralobar
connectivity in the temporal and frontal lobes, as well as connec-
tions between the frontal and temporal lobes that are more promi-
nent in the frontal-to-temporal than in the temporal-to-frontal
direction (210, 211). An intriguing aspect of these studies is the
observation that, whereas interhemispheric connections between
the frontal lobes are relatively common, temporal-temporal con-
nections appear sparse, being observed in <20% of patients (211).
This begs the question of which neuronal pathways are responsible
for bitemporal synchronized spiking as well as the propagation of
seizures from one temporal lobe to the other one (212). Recently,
David et al. (213) generalized this approach offering to develop an
atlas of evoked effective connectivity that would eventually allow,
through data sharing,sampling most of the human brain’s volume.
Direct electrical stimulation has also been used to speciﬁ-
cally evaluate epileptic networks, the general idea being that the
responses of remote sites to stimulation of epileptogenic cortex
(214) or the responses of epileptogenic cortex to stimulation of
remote sites (215) differ from those involving only normal brain
tissue. Interestingly, the network of brain areas that respond to
DESof theseizure-onsetzoneoverlapspartiallybutnotcompletely
with the areas of ictal propagation, suggesting both that seizures
propagate sequentially through multiple nodes in the network and
that some existing connections between the seizure-onset zone
and distant brain areas“shut down”during seizures (216). Further
research combining iEEG and DES, as well as integrating these
techniques with fMRI and high-density non-invasive electromag-
neticrecordings,willimproveourunderstandingof thephysiology
of seizure networks.
WHAT WE CAN LEARN FROM ANIMAL MODELS
Recording the activity of any node suspected to be determinant in
the disease is not feasible in human beings, contrarily to animal
research. Moreover,animal-related technologies offer the possibil-
itytodesiccateandmanipulatecellularandmolecularcomponents
of such networks, as well as scrutinizing the associated structural
and functional alterations. A great perspective in pathological
networks study is detecting features associated with the risk of
recurrence after a ﬁrst seizure as well as predicting the evolution
toward pharmaco-resistance.
Animal models allow studying networks connectivity and
recording the underlying brain activity with high spatial coverage
and resolution (217), and addressing the process of epilepto-
genesis and ictogenesis, including their molecular and genetic
mechanisms at cellular and subcellular levels (218–222). Imbal-
ance between excitation and inhibition might not only occur at the
local microscopic level (223, 224), but could also reﬂect dysregula-
tion of excitatory and inhibitory neuronal interactions at a larger
(network) scale. Recent evidence emphasizes the modiﬁcations of
the network dynamic, or network conﬁguration that character-
izes, and sometimes precedes or even predicts a seizure. Network
analysis could be a powerful tool to more precisely deﬁne the dif-
ferent epilepsies and develop new treatments that target networks,
instead of focal activity (11, 100).
In animals and human beings, focal onsets have been identiﬁed
in generalized epilepsy, and complex large-scale network involve-
ment has been shown in focal epilepsies (8, 11, 14). Spontaneous
epileptic disease occurs in animals, as in the case of the genetic
absence epileptic rats of Strasbourg (GAERS) or in the WAG/Rij
rats (225–227); other models studied are epileptic conditions
induced by – mainly – chemical or electrical interventions (220).
A major animal model of TLE is the kainate, or pilocarpine, model
of hippocampal sclerosis (HS) (228–232). Kainate,a glutamatergic
agonist, is injected either in the hippocampus or intraperitoneally.
It is suspected that the kainate has a tropism for the hippocam-
pus, which led several authors to consider that the kainate induces
speciﬁcally a HS. Yet, the mechanisms by which kainate induces
an epileptic activity is still debated; the immune system and leak-
age of the blood–brain barrier have been cited as critical for the
expression of the disease (233, 234). Hence, it is not excluded that
systemic kainate may have diffuse effects on the brain.
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 10


--- 第 11 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
Models of focally induced epileptic disorders might avoid this
limitation. One of them, electrical kindling, triggers focal epilep-
tic activity using focal electrical stimulation in accordance with
standard stimulation parameters,e.g.,duration of the stimulation,
frequency, and intensity of the stimulus (220, 235, 236). The emer-
gence of a distant pathological activity can be related to remote
effects of the focally induced epilepsy, and not to the direct diffuse
effects of the electrical or chemical triggers. Electrical stimulation,
in particular of the performant-path, has also been described as a
model of induced status epilepticus (237, 238).
CONNECTIVITY STUDIES IN ANIMALS
Electrophysiology can assess connectivity and RS networks in ani-
mal models of epilepsy by recording several brain regions simul-
taneously. The great advantage is that the signal can be directly
linked to neuronal activity. Using intrahippocampal recording
in a rat model of induced TLE, Wang et al. (239) showed that
neuronal pairs presented a decreased FC prior to the status epilep-
ticus induced by an intraperitoneal injection of pilocarpine. Using
Graph Theory measures in an in vitro Mg2+-free model of hip-
pocampal epilepsy, Gong et al. (240) reported the modiﬁcations
in network conﬁguration that appear in parallel to epileptiform
discharges. More interestingly, they revealed that the changes in
network conﬁguration appeared before and lasted longer than the
epileptiform discharges (240). These two observations suggest that
the classical ictal activity, i.e., the presence of spikes in the EEG,
could be the resultant of network reconﬁguration, i.e., it could
even be an epiphenomenon of a more profound alteration in brain
connectivity, indicating that it could be possible to identify certain
network alterations as a biomarker of epilepsy. Such studies aimed
at identifying markers of an upcoming ictal activity and have
mainly looked at the local activity changes (241). Knowledge on
remote involvement is sparse. Recent works (224) showed struc-
tural alterations remote from the focus, but only a few evidence of
distant, abnormal neuronal activity exists (242). Major advance-
ment has been made to record as many neurons or neuronal
populations as possible at the same time (145,243–248);this shows
the feasibility to investigate large-scale networks in animal models
with high temporal and spatial resolution (Figure 6). Their combi-
nation with effective connectivity measures (25) will help to better
understand the hierarchical organization of epileptic networks.
Gong et al. (240) demonstrated the leading activity of pyramidal
cells over granular cells in an in vitro model of TLE, illustrating
the utility of effective connectivity in the ﬁeld of epilepsy.
Research on animal models of epilepsy has been dominated by
invasive electro-physiology technique. Recently, the combination
of EEG and fMRI has emerged with interesting results, such as
those reported by Englot et al. (192), where they describe how a
partial limbic seizure lead to neocortical slow-wave activity; yet,
technical issues makes difﬁcult to obtain combined EEG-fMRI in
awake animals. As in Englot et al. (192), fMRI could possibly be
a powerful in vivo screening method for anatomical regions that
could then be more deeply investigated with EEG.
Using fMRI, Mishra et al. (249) showed that rats submitted
to traumatic brain injury through left parietal ﬂuid percussion
presented a decreased correlation coefﬁcient between the left pari-
etal cortex and other brain regions. Dysfunctional activity in the
FIGURE 6 | Dynamic of somato-sensory network mapped with
high-density EEG. Somato-sensory evoked potential (SEP) from left
whisker stimulation. Top left: each black dot represents the position of one
recording electrode; the most anterior one is ground.Top right: 31 electrode
traces displaying the SEP with sub-milliseconds resolution. Bottom left: the
same electrode traces represented over the mouse brain. In the
lissencephalic mouse brain, dipoles are estimated to be generated below
the recording electrodes. Bottom right: segmentation of the SEP in six
stable conﬁgurations of potential maps. The technique’s high spatial and
temporal resolutions identify the ﬁrst component, somato-sensory barrel
ﬁeld activity, followed by motor cortex and contra-lateral somato-sensory
areas recruitment within a few milliseconds. Adapted from Megevand et al.
(243) with permission.
left parietal cortex, as highlighted by the decreased correlation
coefﬁcient could have been expected, yet the pattern of resting
BOLD-fMRI connectivity showed that only certain regions were
speciﬁcally affected, namely the left hippocampus and the contra-
lateral parietal cortex. This illustrates that BOLD-fMRI can be
used to identify secondary dysfunctional brain regions in rodents
following a proepileptogenic injury (249). The same group inves-
tigated with fMRI the FC in WAG/Rij rats (250) and found an
increased correlation between brain areas suspected to be involved
in seizures when compared to non-epileptic rats; more impor-
tantly, this increase was observed outside of the ictal periods. Choi
et al. (251) performed a FC study using the 18ﬂuorodeoxyglucose
positron emission tomography (PET) signal in a rat model of
TLE. They revealed the decreased correlation of several pairs of
brain structures, most of them included left amygdala and left
entorhinal cortex (251). Hence, despite the systemic injection of
pilocarpine, the affected network appeared to be mainly restricted
to the left hemisphere (251). It would have been very interesting
to see if the electro-physiological counterpart of such functional
deﬁcit was also restricted to one hemisphere, yet no EEG record-
ing was reported. Asymmetry in the central nervous system is well
recognized, e.g., asymmetry of the temporal lobes, but the reason
why the left hemisphere appears to be more functionally altered
in this rat model of TLE is unclear, although electro-physiological
experiments suggest that the left hemisphere is indeed more prone
to develop epileptic discharges (252). The authors claimed that
the PET images were acquired in the interictal period, but no
EEG recording was used (251); yet, if true, this would suggest that
epileptic animals can be identiﬁed as such on the basis of the FC
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 11


--- 第 12 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
of particular networks outside of any ictal activity. These studies
(249–251) indicate that the pathological process in these rats is
ongoing: the epileptic brain is not suffering from epilepsy only
during seizures.
The anatomical basis of FC is largely unclear. Zhou et al. (253)
nicely investigated the anatomical substrate and plasticity of such
connections. They observed that after partial posterior calloso-
tomy of wild-type rats, the FC of the auditory and visual cortices
decreased at day 7 and returned to baseline at day 28, whereas
this decrease was still present in rats submitted to complete cal-
losotomy (253). The authors concluded that it could be possible
to identify the anatomical basis of FC, and that these functional
connections were also capable of plasticity. This is an important
proof-of-concept: it is possible to identify morphological substrate
of functional connections and manipulate them.
DIFFERENTIAL INVOLVEMENT OF SPECIFIC BRAIN REGIONS IN ANIMAL
MODELS OF GENERALIZED EPILEPSY
Different rat models of generalized absence epilepsy have been
studied and all share the presence of the characteristic SWDs (254,
255). Using combined EEG-fMRI in WAG/Rij rats, Mishra et al.
(250) demonstrated that during SWDs,the associated ﬂuctuations
in the BOLD signal were speciﬁc to certain brain regions. Indeed,
the somato-sensory barrel ﬁeld showed an increase, whereas the
striatumshowedadecreaseintheBOLDsignalandcerebralblood-
ﬂow (225, 250). On the other hand, the local-ﬁeld potential (LFP)
and the multi-unit activity (MUA) were increased in both regions
(225). Vascular steal or dopamine-regulated blood volume could
account, at least in part, for this lack of matching between BOLD
signal and CBF on the one hand and LFP and MUA on the other
hand (225). An earlier study using surface and deep EEG record-
ings in the same rat-model showed that these rats shared a similar
focuslocatedintheventrolateralpartof thesomato-sensorycortex
(SC) (145). More importantly, the authors observed that the ictal
activity of the cortical focus preceded the one in the thalamus,sug-
gesting that the cortex was leading the thalamus (145). Nersesyan
et al. (256) investigated the relation between SWDs and CBF in the
same animal model. They showed that regions involved in SWDs,
i.e.,SC,presenteda1-to2-sdelayedincreaseinCBFduringaSWD,
whereas this increase did not appear in regions not involved in the
SWDs,such as primary visual cortex (256). In a parallel work using
the same animal model of absence epilepsy, they observed that the
BOLD signal was not equally modiﬁed across brain regions during
a SWD (257): the somato-sensory and motor cortices, as well as
subcortical regions, i.e., thalamus, basal ganglia, and brainstem,
showed an increased BOLD signal, whereas other regions such as
the occipital cortex did not show such a modulation of the sig-
nal (257). Again, the increase in the BOLD signal appeared with
a lag of a few seconds after the electro-physiological SWDs (257).
This ﬁnding is in contrast with a work by Desalvo et al. (258), in
which they used a rat model of generalized tonico-clonic seizures
induced by injection of iv bicuculline, and observed that BOLD
increased signiﬁcantly in primary and secondary somato-sensory
cortices, as well as in primary auditory cortex and thalamus before
the onset of electro-physiological seizures. The role of the SC in
initiating GSWDs was further investigated through inactivation
of this cortical region in GAERS animals (259). The pharmaco-
logical inactivation of the SC with the sodium channel blocker
tetrodotoxine prevented the spike-and-wave activity; yet unilateral
application of the drug did not completely abolish the abnormal
contra-lateral oscillations. On the whole, these studies highlight
the importance of abnormal focal brain activity as a potential trig-
ger of generalized seizures (258). The identiﬁcation of interacting
yet independent nodes within a network of suspected generalized
epilepsy is a major advance in epilepsy research. Indeed,it will per-
mit to reﬁne the therapeutic intervention toward the manipulation
of one particular and decisive node.
SHORT-RANGE AND LONG-RANGE NETWORK MODULATIONS IN
ANIMAL MODELS OF FOCAL EPILEPSY
Different animal models of focal epilepsy exist (220), such as the
kainate- or pilocarpine-models of MTLE (228,229,260),posttrau-
matic epilepsy (261, 262), or electrical kindling (227, 263). Despite
an initially focal insult, recent evidence (e.g., 242) shows that
remote brain areas become affected by the pathological activity
of the epileptic focus.
The induction of a focal epileptic syndrome in a rat model
of generalized epilepsy allows better understanding how these
two entities interact. Carcak et al. (227) took advantage of the
fact that absence epilepsy may increase the resistance to limbic
seizures. They investigated the role of the cortico-thalamo-cortical
circuitry, involved in SWDs, in the development of limbic seizures
induced by unilateral electrical stimulation of the rat amygdala.
Whereas control rats, i.e., those without absence epilepsy, pre-
sented all convulsive epileptic seizures following amygdala elec-
trical stimulation, rats suffering from absence epilepsy did not
(227). In order to understand how the circuit involved in absence
epilepsy could affect the one of TLE, the authors investigated
the spontaneous activity in the reticular thalamic nucleus (RTN),
known to be involved in the slow-waves discharges that character-
ize absence epilepsy (227). Remarkably, the electrical stimulation
of the amygdala had a different effect on the mean ﬁring fre-
quency of neurons of the RTN: in not-stimulated animals, there
was no signiﬁcant difference between epileptic and non-epileptic
rats, whereas the increase after stimulation was higher in epilep-
tic rats when compared to non-epileptic rats (227). This suggests
ﬁrst that the development of an epileptic focus alters the activity
of neurons in the RTN and second that this alteration depends
on the activity before the induction of the epilepsy. The use of
Wistar rats as controls for GAERS rats in that study is commonly
accepted, but could still be questioned; yet the conclusion would
still remains the same: the effects of an epileptic focus seem to
depend on the brain state in which it is being established. It
would hence be interesting to investigate how an epileptic focus
affects a given network, but also how a particular network con-
ﬁguration can modulate the effects of an epileptic focus. The
involvement of the thalamus in propagation of temporal lobe
seizures has already been the scope of several studies (156, 264).
If the thalamus has a major role in the generation of SWDs
(227), this could highlight the relevance of studying the interac-
tion between hippocampus and thalamus, in the context of focal
epilepsies.
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 12


--- 第 13 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
Hippocampal sclerosis is a frequent lesion that has been
deeply investigated, although, most of the works conducted local,
intrahippocampal recordings. Yet, recent publications have shown
the involvement of remote brain areas. Using 16 bipolar deep elec-
trodes in the pilocarpine rat-model of HS, Toyoda et al. (247)
showed that the initial focus varied from one seizure to another
in each individual rat. The subiculum, the dorsal and ventral
hippocampus, and the amygdala were the regions where seizure
onsets were most often recorded. All regions could be considered
as belonging to the same network; indeed, an interesting obser-
vation is that most seizures were convulsive, and this did not
depend upon where the seizure started (247). This suggests that the
involved network is more determining than the seizure-onset zone
for the clinical expression of a seizure. Long-range modiﬁcations
in the kainate mouse-model of TLE were also observed. It has been
shown that non-injected hippocampus presented indeed morpho-
logicalalterations,notablyintheexpressionof theneuropeptide-Y,
which is known to modulate neuronal activity (265, 266), and
electro-physiological changes, such as signiﬁcant decrease in the
power of the theta frequency band (265). In vitro, Khalilov et al.
(267) demonstrated that a mirror focus in the contra-lateral hip-
pocampus appears after 10–15 successive applications of kainate
in the ipsilateral hippocampus. These ﬁndings are in line with
the hypothesis that an epileptic focus leads to permanent electro-
physiological and morphological modiﬁcations in remote brain
areas (268–270). Other works have also stressed the possibility that
subcortical brain regions,such as the basal ganglia,could inﬂuence
or even inhibit the progression of an ictal activity originating from
the temporal lobe (271, 272).
Evidence of distant brain involvement arises also from electri-
cally induced epilepsy. For instance, during hippocampal seizures
induced by electrical stimulation in rats, the frontal neocortex
presented a parallel modiﬁcation in spontaneous activity, i.e., fast
polyspike activity when the seizure was generalized and slow oscil-
lations when it was partial (242). This example illustrates that
distant brain areas are affected even after a few or only one focal
epileptic seizure. It would be extremely interesting to study how
this involvement evolves in a chronic disease.
On the whole, evidence exists that other brain areas are
recruited in propagation or in inhibition of the seizure spread.
Hence, the epileptic threshold does not seem to depend only on
the imbalance between excitation and inhibition within the focus,
but could also be determined by the intricate interactions between
the components of a given network.
EXPERIMENTAL THERAPEUTIC INTERVENTIONS ON THE EPILEPTIC
NETWORK
Conceiving epilepsy as a network disease has therapeutic con-
sequences. The classical view is to modulate the activity of the
so-called epileptic focus, or seizure-onset zone, in order to con-
trol the disease. Yet, any node of an epileptic network could
possibly be a target. In this sense, open-loop or closed-loop
devices, either through electrical or optogenetic stimulation, are
promising tools for generalized (217) as well as for focal epilepsy
(273, 274). Major work has shown that it is possible to iden-
tify critical nodes in a given epileptic network: the modiﬁcation
of their activation – mainly inhibition – could help to control,
or even stop an ictal activity. Paz et al. (274) showed in a rat
model of cortical epilepsy that the inactivation through optoge-
netics of the thalamic ventrobasal nucleus could stop an ongoing
seizure. In the same line, Langlois et al. (264) showed in an
in vivo model of TLE that DBS of the ipsilateral parafascicular
nucleus of the thalamus (PF) stopped the ongoing hippocam-
pal paroxysmal discharges (HPD), while higher current intensities
were needed to stop the HPD if DBS was applied to neighbor-
ing areas (264), illustrating the speciﬁcity of PF in controlling
HPDs. The anterior thalamic nucleus (ANT) appears also to be
involved in control or spread of epileptic activity of mesial tempo-
ral onset (156).Ablation or electrical stimulation of ANT increases
the epileptic threshold (263, 275–277); yet, opposite results have
also been observed (278). On the whole, ANT is a recognized
target for refractory epilepsy, although mechanisms by which
manipulation of the ANT increases epileptic threshold are poorly
understood. Use of animal research and the possibility to iden-
tify how the activity of ANT may modulate epileptic activity
at remote sites, e.g., with the use of effective connectivity mea-
sures, is crucial to tailor therapeutic interventions. Such recent
evidence shows that the manipulation of the primary epilep-
tic focus does not seem to be the only possibility to achieve
the control of an epileptic disease. The thalamus in particular,
and other subcortical regions as well (272) have been identiﬁed
as major targets for epileptic network modulation culminating
in clinical applications in the form of DBS of ANT in focal
epilepsies (279).
CONCLUSION
With increasingly complex methodological strategies and an ever-
increasing wealth of possible approaches, the study of brain con-
nectivity and its neuroscientiﬁc and clinical correlates are very
promising. Nevertheless, the application of connectivity tech-
niques for diagnostic or prognostic purposes requires further
studies to be ﬁrmly grounded by invasive studies and sufﬁcient
follow-up investigations before it can be reliably applied to the
clinical management of individual patients. Combining func-
tional techniques can lead to the achievement of complementary
information for improving each single technique.
Focal epilepsies, despite focal epileptogenic zone, are dis-
eases affecting the whole brain: altered large-scale FC is reﬂected
in neuropsychological features of individual speciﬁc syndrome.
Hippocrates (400 years b.c.) considered epilepsy as a systemic
disease, centered in the brain, due to an altered “deﬂuxion of
cold phlegm” through the body. In more recent times, the con-
cept of epilepsy as “focus disease” has been largely developed
(280–282), whereas in the last decade it has shifted to a “brain-
network disease” (15). In parallel to the “brain-network” concept
of epilepsy, psychiatric and neurological co-morbidities, such as
strokes, dementia, and migraine are more and more deﬁned.
Interestingly, somatic co-morbidities have also come to light,
since several medical conditions, such as cardiac, gastrointesti-
nal, and respiratory disorders, are often associated with epilepsy
(283). These ﬁndings may lead to re-consider epilepsy as a “sys-
temic disease,” this time with the diagnostic and therapeutic
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 13


--- 第 14 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
knowledge obtained recently by ground-breaking work on net-
work analysis.
Concerning “generalized” epilepsy, neuro-imaging, and espe-
cially connectivity studies have allowed considering them as focal
brain disorders with fast bilateral discharge propagation. This
concept leads to the idea that focal and generalized epilepsies
are the two extremes of a single spectrum and to a possible
new way of studying mechanisms of AED: do they have an
effect on particular nodes of a network where receptors are more
expressed? Is it possible to detect an anatomical target to avoid
generation/propagation of seizures, using disconnection or stim-
ulation? For all these reasons, translational research in light of
network analysis, based on fundamental science through animal
experiments and clinical perspectives through human research,
opens new opportunities to better understand the complexity
of epilepsy and deﬁne new and more effective treatments for
patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Francesca Pittau is supported by the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation (FNS SPUM grant 140332). Serge Vulliemoz is supported
by grant FNS 141165 and the Gertrude von Meissner Foundation.
Laurent Sheybani is supported by grant FNS 323530_158125).
Frédéric Grouiller is supported by the Center for Biomedical Imag-
ing of the Universities and Hospitals of Geneva and Lausanne,
and EPFL. We thank Dr. Gaetano Cantalupo (Verona) for the
thoughtful comments during the manuscript preparation.
REFERENCES
1. Hauser WA, Annegers JF, Kurland LT. Incidence of epilepsy and unprovoked
seizures in Rochester, Minnesota: 1935-1984. Epilepsia (1993) 34:453–68.
2. Sander JW. The epidemiology of epilepsy revisited. Curr Opin Neurol (2003)
16:165–70. doi:10.1097/00019052-200304000-00008
3. Schuele SU, Luders HO. Intractable epilepsy: management and therapeu-
tic alternatives. Lancet Neurol (2008) 7:514–24. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(08)
70108-X
4. Bancaud J. Surgery of epilepsy based on stereotactic investigations – the plan
of the SEEG investigation. Acta Neurochir Suppl (Wien) (1980) 30:25–34.
doi:10.1007/978-3-7091-8592-6_4
5. Spencer S, Huh L. Outcomes of epilepsy surgery in adults and children. Lancet
Neurol (2008) 7:525–37. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(08)70109-1
6. De Tisi J, Bell GS, Peacock JL, McEvoy AW, Harkness WF, Sander JW, et al. The
long-term outcome of adult epilepsy surgery, patterns of seizure remission,
and relapse: a cohort study. Lancet (2011) 378:1388–95. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(11)60890-8
7. Rosenow F, Luders H. Presurgical evaluation of epilepsy. Brain (2001)
124:1683–700. doi:10.1093/brain/124.9.1683
8. Laufs H, Hamandi K, Salek-Haddadi A, Kleinschmidt AK, Duncan JS, Lemieux
L. Temporal lobe interictal epileptic discharges affect cerebral activity in
“default mode” brain regions. Hum Brain Mapp (2007) 28:1023–32. doi:10.
1002/hbm.20323
9. Gotman J. Epileptic networks studied with EEG-fMRI. Epilepsia (2008)
49(Suppl 3):42–51. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01509.x
10. Fahoum F, Lopes R, Pittau F, Dubeau F, Gotman J. Widespread epileptic
networks in focal epilepsies-EEG-fMRI study. Epilepsia (2012) 53:1618–27.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03533.x
11. Richardson MP. Large scale brain models of epilepsy: dynamics meets connec-
tomics. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2012) 83:1238–48. doi:10.1136/jnnp-
2011-301944
12. Varotto G, Tassi L, Franceschetti S, Spreaﬁco R, Panzica F. Epileptogenic net-
works of type II focal cortical dysplasia: a stereo-EEG study. Neuroimage (2012)
61:591–8. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.090
13. Engel J Jr, Thompson PM, Stern JM, Staba RJ, Bragin A, Mody I. Connec-
tomics and epilepsy. Curr Opin Neurol (2013) 26:186–94. doi:10.1097/WCO.
0b013e32835ee5b8
14. Stefan H, Lopes da Silva FH. Epileptic neuronal networks: methods of identiﬁ-
cation and clinical relevance. Front Neurol (2013) 4:8. doi:10.3389/fneur.2013.
00008
15. BergAT,Berkovic SF,Brodie MJ,Buchhalter J,Cross JH,Van Emde BoasW,et al.
Revised terminology and concepts for organization of seizures and epilepsies:
report of the ILAE commission on classiﬁcation and terminology, 2005-2009.
Epilepsia (2010) 51:676–85. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02522.x
16. Gotman J, Grova C, Bagshaw A, Kobayashi E, Aghakhani Y, Dubeau F. Gener-
alized epileptic discharges show thalamocortical activation and suspension of
the default state of the brain. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2005) 102:15236–40.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0504935102
17. Smith SM, Fox PT, Miller KL, Glahn DC, Fox PM, MacKay CE, et al.
Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture during activation
and rest. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2009) 106:13040–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.
0905267106
18. Biswal BB, Mennes M, Zuo XN, Gohel S, Kelly C, Smith SM, et al. Toward
discovery science of human brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
107:4734–9. doi:10.1073/pnas.0911855107
19. Tomarken AJ, Waller NG. Structural equation modeling: strengths, limita-
tions,and misconceptions. Annu Rev Clin Psychol (2005) 1:31–65. doi:10.1146/
annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.144239
20. Friston KJ, Harrison L, Penny W. Dynamic causal modelling. Neuroimage
(2003) 19:1273–302. doi:10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00202-7
21. Granger CWJ. Investigating causal relations by econometric models and cross-
spectral methods. Econometrica (1969) 37:424–38. doi:10.2307/1912791
22. Keller CJ, Bickel S, Entz L, Ulbert I, Milham MP, Kelly C, et al. Intrinsic func-
tional architecture predicts electrically evoked responses in the human brain.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011) 108:10308–13. doi:10.1073/pnas.1019750108
23. AstolﬁL, Cincotti F, Mattia D, De Vico Fallani F, Lai M, Baccala L, et al. Com-
parison of different multivariate methods for the estimation of cortical con-
nectivity: simulations and applications to EEG data. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med
Biol Soc (2005) 5:4484–7. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2005.1615463
24. Smith SM, Miller KL, Salimi-Khorshidi G, Webster M, Beckmann CF,
Nichols TE, et al. Network modelling methods for FMRI. Neuroimage (2011)
54:875–91. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.08.063
25. Plomp G, Quairiaux C, Michel CM, AstolﬁL. The physiological plausibility of
time-varying Granger-causal modeling: normalization and weighting by spec-
tral power. Neuroimage (2014) 97C:206–16. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.
04.016
26. Bullmore E, Sporns O. Complex brain networks: graph theoretical analysis
of structural and functional systems. Nat Rev Neurosci (2009) 10:186–98.
doi:10.1038/nrn2575
27. Ogawa S,Tank DW,Menon R,Ellermann JM,Kim SG,Merkle H,et al. Intrinsic
signal changes accompanying sensory stimulation: functional brain mapping
with magnetic resonance imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (1992) 89:5951–5.
doi:10.1073/pnas.89.13.5951
28. Greicius MD, Krasnow B, Reiss AL, Menon V. Functional connectivity in the
resting brain: a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis. Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A (2003) 100:253–8. doi:10.1073/pnas.0135058100
29. Shmuel A, Leopold DA. Neuronal correlates of spontaneous ﬂuctuations in
fMRI signals in monkey visual cortex: implications for functional connectivity
at rest. Hum Brain Mapp (2008) 29:751–61. doi:10.1002/hbm.20580
30. Fahoum F, Zelmann R, Tyvaert L, Dubeau F, Gotman J. Epileptic discharges
affect the default mode network – FMRI and intracerebral EEG evidence. PLoS
One (2013) 8:e68038. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0068038
31. Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman GL.
A default mode of brain function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2001) 98:676–82.
doi:10.1073/pnas.98.2.676
32. Buckner RL, Andrews-Hanna JR, Schacter DL. The brain’s default network:
anatomy, function, and relevance to disease. Ann N Y Acad Sci (2008)
1124:1–38. doi:10.1196/annals.1440.011
33. Cavanna AE, Trimble MR. The precuneus: a review of its functional anatomy
and behavioural correlates. Brain (2006) 129:564–83. doi:10.1093/brain/
awl004
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 14


--- 第 15 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
34. Biswal B, Yetkin FZ, Haughton VM, Hyde JS. Functional connectivity in the
motor cortex of resting human brain using echo-planar MRI. Magn Reson Med
(1995) 34:537–41. doi:10.1002/mrm.1910340409
35. McKeown MJ, Makeig S, Brown GG, Jung TP, Kindermann SS, Bell AJ, et al.
Analysis of fMRI data by blind separation into independent spatial compo-
nents. Hum Brain Mapp (1998) 6:160–88. doi:10.1002/(SICI)1097-0193(1998)
6:5/6<368::AID-HBM7>3.3.CO;2-5
36. Bellec P, Rosa-Neto P, Lyttelton OC, Benali H, Evans AC. Multi-level bootstrap
analysis of stable clusters in resting-state fMRI. Neuroimage (2010) 51:1126–39.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.02.082
37. Lemieux L, Daunizeau J, Walker MC. Concepts of connectivity and human
epilepticactivity.FrontSystNeurosci (2011)5:12.doi:10.3389/fnsys.2011.00012
38. Biswal BB. Resting state fMRI: a personal history. Neuroimage (2012)
62:938–44. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.01.090
39. De Vico Fallani F, AstolﬁL, Cincotti F, Mattia D, Maglione AG, Vecchiato G,
et al. Large-scale cortical networks estimated from scalp EEG signals during
performance of goal-directed motor tasks. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc
(2010) 2010:1738–41. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2010.5626710
40. De Pasquale F, Della Penna S, Snyder AZ, Lewis C, Mantini D, Marzetti L, et al.
Temporal dynamics of spontaneous MEG activity in brain networks. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A (2010) 107:6040–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.0913863107
41. Brookes MJ, Woolrich M, Luckhoo H, Price D, Hale JR, Stephenson MC, et al.
Investigating the electrophysiological basis of resting state networks using
magnetoencephalography. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2011) 108:16783–8.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1112685108
42. Cabral J, Kringelbach ML, Deco G. Exploring the network dynamics underly-
ing brain activity during rest. Prog Neurobiol (2014) 114:102–31. doi:10.1016/
j.pneurobio.2013.12.005
43. Lehmann D. Topography of spontaneous alpha EEG ﬁelds in humans. Elec-
troencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol (1971) 30:161–2.
44. Dierks T, Jelic V, Julin P, Maurer K, Wahlund LO, Almkvist O, et al. EEG-
microstates in mild memory impairment and Alzheimer’s disease: possible
association with disturbed information processing. J Neural Transm (1997)
104:483–95. doi:10.1007/BF01277666
45. Strelets V, Faber PL, Golikova J, Novototsky-Vlasov V, Koenig T, Gian-
otti LR, et al. Chronic schizophrenics with positive symptomatology have
shortened EEG microstate durations. Clin Neurophysiol (2003) 114:2043–51.
doi:10.1016/S1388-2457(03)00211-6
46. Koenig T, Prichep L, Lehmann D, Sosa PV, Braeker E, Kleinlogel H, et al.
Millisecond by millisecond, year by year: normative EEG microstates and
developmental stages. Neuroimage (2002) 16:41–8. doi:10.1006/nimg.2002.
1070
47. Lehmann D, Strik WK, Henggeler B, Koenig T, Koukkou M. Brain electric
microstates and momentary conscious mind states as building blocks of spon-
taneous thinking: I. Visual imagery and abstract thoughts. Int J Psychophysiol
(1998) 29:1–11.
48. Michel CM, Murray MM. Towards the utilization of EEG as a brain imaging
tool. Neuroimage (2012) 61:371–85. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.12.039
49. Britz J, Van De Ville D, Michel CM. BOLD correlates of EEG topography
reveal rapid resting-state network dynamics. Neuroimage (2010) 52:1162–70.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.02.052
50. Mantini D, Perrucci MG, Del Gratta C, Romani GL, Corbetta M. Electrophys-
iological signatures of resting state networks in the human brain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A (2007) 104:13170–5. doi:10.1073/pnas.0700668104
51. Van De Ville D, Britz J, Michel CM. EEG microstate sequences in healthy
humans at rest reveal scale-free dynamics. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A (2010)
107:18179–84. doi:10.1073/pnas.1007841107
52. Knowlton RC,Elgavish RA,Limdi N,BartolucciA,Ojha B,Blount J,et al. Func-
tional imaging: I. relative predictive value of intracranial electroencephalogra-
phy. Ann Neurol (2008) 64:25–34. doi:10.1002/ana.21389
53. Knowlton RC, Razdan SN, Limdi N, Elgavish RA, Killen J, Blount J, et al. Effect
of epilepsy magnetic source imaging on intracranial electrode placement. Ann
Neurol (2009) 65:716–23. doi:10.1002/ana.21660
54. BrodbeckV,Spinelli L,LascanoAM,Wissmeier M,Vargas MI,Vulliemoz S,et al.
Electroencephalographic source imaging: a prospective study of 152 operated
epileptic patients. Brain (2011) 134:2887–97. doi:10.1093/brain/awr243
55. Megevand P, Spinelli L, Genetti M, Brodbeck V, Momjian S, Schaller K, et al.
Electric source imaging of interictal activity accurately localises the seizure
onset zone. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2014) 85:38–43. doi:10.1136/jnnp-
2013-305515
56. Schoffelen JM, Gross J. Source connectivity analysis with MEG and EEG. Hum
Brain Mapp (2009) 30:1857–65. doi:10.1002/hbm.20745
57. Plummer C, Harvey AS, Cook M. EEG source localization in focal epilepsy:
where are we now? Epilepsia (2008) 49:201–18. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.
01381.x
58. Kaiboriboon K, Luders HO, Hamaneh M, Turnbull J, Lhatoo SD. EEG source
imaging in epilepsy – practicalities and pitfalls. Nat Rev Neurol (2012)
8:498–507. doi:10.1038/nrneurol.2012.150
59. Birot G, Spinelli L, Vulliemoz S, Megevand P, Brunet D, Seeck M, et al. Head
model and electrical source imaging: a study of 38 epileptic patients. Neuroim-
age Clin (2014) 5:77–83. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2014.06.005
60. Plummer C, Wagner M, Fuchs M, Harvey AS, Cook MJ. Dipole versus distrib-
uted EEG source localization for single versus averaged spikes in focal epilepsy.
J Clin Neurophysiol (2010) 27:141–62. doi:10.1097/WNP.0b013e3181dd5004
61. DaiY,Zhang W,Dickens DL,He B. Source connectivity analysis from MEG and
its application to epilepsy source localization. Brain Topogr (2012) 25:157–66.
doi:10.1007/s10548-011-0211-0
62. Jin SH,JeongW,Chung CK. Information source in multiple MEG spike clusters
can be identiﬁed by effective connectivity in focal cortical dysplasia. Epilepsy
Res (2013) 105:118–24. doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2013.01.011
63. Tanaka N, Peters JM, Prohl AK, Takaya S, Madsen JR, Bourgeois BF, et al.
Clinical value of magnetoencephalographic spike propagation represented by
spatiotemporal source analysis: correlation with surgical outcome. Epilepsy Res
(2014) 108:280–8. doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2013.11.006
64. DouwL,VanDellenE,DeGrootM,HeimansJJ,KleinM,StamCJ,et al.Epilepsy
is related to theta band brain connectivity and network topology in brain tumor
patients. BMC Neurosci (2010) 11:103. doi:10.1186/1471-2202-11-103
65. VanDellenE,DouwL,HillebrandA,DeWittHamerPC,BaayenJC,HeimansJJ,
et al. Epilepsy surgery outcome and functional network alterations in longitu-
dinal MEG: a minimum spanning tree analysis. Neuroimage (2014) 86:354–63.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.010
66. Varotto G, Visani E, Canafoglia L, Franceschetti S, Avanzini G, Panzica
F. Enhanced frontocentral EEG connectivity in photosensitive generalized
epilepsies: a partial directed coherence study. Epilepsia (2012) 53:359–67.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03352.x
67. Gupta D, Ossenblok P, Van Luijtelaar G. Space-time network connectivity and
cortical activations preceding spike wave discharges in human absence epilepsy:
a MEG study. Med Biol Eng Comput (2011) 49:555–65. doi:10.1007/s11517-
011-0778-3
68. Malinowska U, Badier JM, Gavaret M, Bartolomei F, Chauvel P, Benar CG.
Interictal networks in magnetoencephalography. Hum Brain Mapp (2014)
35:2789–805. doi:10.1002/hbm.22367
69. Kleen JK, Scott RC, Holmes GL, Roberts DW, Rundle MM, Testorf M, et al.
Hippocampal interictal epileptiform activity disrupts cognition in humans.
Neurology (2013) 81:18–24. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e318297ee50
70. Ives JR, Warach S, Schmitt F, Edelman RR, Schomer DL. Monitoring the
patient’s EEG during echo planar MRI. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol
(1993) 87:417–20. doi:10.1016/0013-4694(93)90156-P
71. Gotman J,Kobayashi E,BagshawAP,Benar CG,Dubeau F. Combining EEG and
fMRI: a multimodal tool for epilepsy research. J Magn Reson Imaging (2006)
23:906–20. doi:10.1002/jmri.20577
72. Van Houdt PJ,De Munck JC,Leijten FS,Huiskamp GJ,ColonAJ,Boon PA,et al.
EEG-fMRI correlation patterns in the presurgical evaluation of focal epilepsy:
a comparison with electrocorticographic data and surgical outcome measures.
Neuroimage (2013) 75:238–48. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.02.033
73. Pittau F, Grouiller F, Spinelli L, Seeck M, Michel CM, Vulliemoz S. The role
of functional neuroimaging in pre-surgical epilepsy evaluation. Front Neurol
(2014) 5:31. doi:10.3389/fneur.2014.00031
74. Seeck M, Lazeyras F, Michel CM, Blanke O, Gericke CA, Ives J, et al. Non-
invasive epileptic focus localization using EEG-triggered functional MRI
and electromagnetic tomography. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol (1998)
106:508–12. doi:10.1016/S0013-4694(98)00017-0
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 15


--- 第 16 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
75. Benar CG, Gross DW, Wang Y, Petre V, Pike B, Dubeau F, et al. The BOLD
response to interictal epileptiform discharges. Neuroimage (2002) 17:1182–92.
doi:10.1006/nimg.2002.1164
76. Thornton R, Vulliemoz S, Rodionov R, Carmichael DW, Chaudhary UJ,
Diehl B, et al. Epileptic networks in focal cortical dysplasia revealed using
electroencephalography-functional magnetic resonance imaging. Ann Neurol
(2011) 70:822–37. doi:10.1002/ana.22535
77. An D, Fahoum F, Hall J, Olivier A, Gotman J, Dubeau F. Electroencephalog-
raphy/functional magnetic resonance imaging responses help predict surgi-
cal outcome in focal epilepsy. Epilepsia (2013) 54:2184–94. doi:10.1111/epi.
12434
78. Grouiller F, Thornton RC, Groening K, Spinelli L, Duncan JS, Schaller K, et al.
With or without spikes: localization of focal epileptic activity by simultaneous
electroencephalography and functional magnetic resonance imaging. Brain
(2011) 134:2867–86. doi:10.1093/brain/awr156
79. Glover GH. Deconvolution of impulse response in event-related BOLD fMRI.
Neuroimage (1999) 9:416–29. doi:10.1006/nimg.1998.0419
80. Bagshaw AP, Aghakhani Y, Benar CG, Kobayashi E, Hawco C, Dubeau F, et al.
EEG-fMRI of focal epileptic spikes: analysis with multiple haemodynamic
functions and comparison with gadolinium-enhanced MR angiograms. Hum
Brain Mapp (2004) 22:179–92. doi:10.1002/hbm.20024
81. Hawco CS, Bagshaw AP, Lu Y, Dubeau F, Gotman J. BOLD changes occur
prior to epileptic spikes seen on scalp EEG. Neuroimage (2007) 35:1450–8.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.12.042
82. Grouiller F, Vercueil L, Krainik A, Segebarth C, Kahane P, David O. Char-
acterization of the hemodynamic modes associated with interictal epilep-
tic activity using a deformable model-based analysis of combined EEG and
functional MRI recordings. Hum Brain Mapp (2010) 31:1157–73. doi:10.1002/
hbm.20925
83. Moeller F, Levan P, Muhle H, Stephani U, Dubeau F, Siniatchkin M, et al.
Absence seizures: individual patterns revealed by EEG-fMRI. Epilepsia (2010)
51:2000–10. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02698.x
84. Vaudano AE, Avanzini P, Tassi L, Ruggieri A, Cantalupo G, Benuzzi F, et al.
Causality within the epileptic network: an EEG-fMRI study validated by
intracranial EEG. Front Neurol (2013) 4:185. doi:10.3389/fneur.2013.00185
85. Groening K, Brodbeck V, Moeller F, Wolff S, Van Baalen A, Michel CM,
et al. Combination of EEG-fMRI and EEG source analysis improves inter-
pretation of spike-associated activation networks in paediatric pharmacoresis-
tant focal epilepsies. Neuroimage (2009) 46:827–33. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2009.02.026
86. Vulliemoz S, Thornton R, Rodionov R, Carmichael DW, Guye M, Lha-
too S, et al. The spatio-temporal mapping of epileptic networks: combina-
tion of EEG-fMRI and EEG source imaging. Neuroimage (2009) 46:834–43.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.01.070
87. Laufs H, Richardson MP, Salek-Haddadi A, Vollmar C, Duncan JS, Gale
K, et al. Converging PET and fMRI evidence for a common area involved
in human focal epilepsies. Neurology (2011) 77:904–10. doi:10.1212/WNL.
0b013e31822c90f2
88. Flanagan D, Badawy RA, Jackson GD. EEG-fMRI in focal epilepsy: local activa-
tion and regional networks. Clin Neurophysiol (2014) 125:21–31. doi:10.1016/
j.clinph.2013.06.182
89. Vaudano AE, Carmichael DW, Salek-Haddadi A, Rampp S, Stefan H, Lemieux
L, et al. Networks involved in seizure initiation. A reading epilepsy case studied
with EEG-fMRI and MEG. Neurology (2012) 79:249–53. doi:10.1212/WNL.
0b013e31825fdf3a
90. Piredda S, Gale K. A crucial epileptogenic site in the deep prepiriform cortex.
Nature (1985) 317:623–5. doi:10.1038/317623a0
91. Racine RJ, Mosher M, Kairiss EW. The role of the pyriform cortex in the
generation of interictal spikes in the kindled preparation. Brain Res (1988)
454:251–63. doi:10.1016/0006-8993(88)90825-6
92. Loscher W, Ebert U. The role of the piriform cortex in kindling. Prog Neurobiol
(1996) 50:427–81. doi:10.1016/S0301-0082(96)00036-6
93. Centeno M, Vollmar C, Stretton J, Symms MR, Thompson PJ, Richardson
MP, et al. Structural changes in the temporal lobe and piriform cortex in
frontal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Res (2014) 108:978–81. doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.
2014.03.001
94. Hamandi K, Powell HW, Laufs H, Symms MR, Barker GJ, Parker GJ, et al.
Combined EEG-fMRI and tractography to visualise propagation of epileptic
activity.JNeurolNeurosurgPsychiatry (2008)79:594–7.doi:10.1136/jnnp.2007.
125401
95. Bhardwaj RD, Mahmoodabadi SZ, Otsubo H, Snead OC III, Rutka JT,
Widjaja E. Diffusion tensor tractography detection of functional path-
way for the spread of epileptiform activity between temporal lobe and
Rolandic region. Childs Nerv Syst (2010) 26:185–90. doi:10.1007/s00381-009-
1017-1
96. Lascano AM, Lemkaddem A, Granziera C, Korff CM, Boex C, Jenny B, et al.
Tracking the source of cerebellar epilepsy: hemifacial seizures associated with
cerebellar cortical dysplasia. Epilepsy Res (2013) 105:245–9. doi:10.1016/j.
eplepsyres.2012.12.010
97. Kleen JK, Scott RC, Holmes GL, Lenck-Santini PP. Hippocampal interictal
spikes disrupt cognition in rats. Ann Neurol (2010) 67:250–7. doi:10.1002/ana.
21896
98. Chaudhary UJ, Centeno M, Carmichael DW, Vollmar C, Rodionov R,
Bonelli S, et al. Imaging the interaction: epileptic discharges, working
memory, and behavior. Hum Brain Mapp (2013) 34:2910–7. doi:10.1002/hbm.
22115
99. Centeno M, Carmichael DW. Network connectivity in epilepsy: resting state
fMRI and EEG-fMRI contributions. Front Neurol (2014) 5:93. doi:10.3389/
fneur.2014.00093
100. Spencer SS. Neural networks in human epilepsy: evidence of and implica-
tions for treatment. Epilepsia (2002) 43:219–27. doi:10.1046/j.1528-1157.2002.
26901.x
101. Voets NL, Adcock JE, Stacey R, Hart Y, Carpenter K, Matthews PM, et al.
Functional and structural changes in the memory network associated with
left temporal lobe epilepsy. Hum Brain Mapp (2009) 30:4070–81. doi:10.1002/
hbm.20830
102. Bettus G, Bartolomei F, Confort-Gouny S, Guedj E, Chauvel P, Cozzone PJ,
et al. Role of resting state functional connectivity MRI in presurgical investi-
gation of mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2010)
81:1147–54. doi:10.1136/jnnp.2009.191460
103. Pereira FR, Alessio A, Sercheli MS, Pedro T, Bilevicius E, Rondina JM, et al.
Asymmetrical hippocampal connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: evi-
dence from resting state fMRI. BMC Neurosci (2010) 11:66. doi:10.1186/1471-
2202-11-66
104. Bettus G, Guedj E, Joyeux F, Confort-Gouny S, Soulier E, Laguitton V, et al.
Decreased basal fMRI functional connectivity in epileptogenic networks and
contralateralcompensatorymechanisms.HumBrainMapp (2009)30:1580–91.
doi:10.1002/hbm.20625
105. Addis DR, Moscovitch M, McAndrews MP. Consequences of hippocampal
damage across the autobiographical memory network in left temporal lobe
epilepsy. Brain (2007) 130:2327–42. doi:10.1093/brain/awm166
106. Powell HW, Richardson MP, Symms MR, Boulby PA, Thompson PJ, Duncan
JS, et al. Reorganization of verbal and nonverbal memory in temporal lobe
epilepsy due to unilateral hippocampal sclerosis. Epilepsia (2007) 48:1512–25.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.01053.x
107. Morgan VL, Rogers BP, Sonmezturk HH, Gore JC, Abou-Khalil B. Cross hip-
pocampal inﬂuence in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy measured with high
temporal resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging. Epilepsia (2011)
52:1741–9. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03196.x
108. Bettus G, Ranjeva JP, Wendling F, Benar CG, Confort-Gouny S, Regis J, et al.
Interictal functional connectivity of human epileptic networks assessed by
intracerebral EEG and BOLD signal ﬂuctuations. PLoS One (2011) 6:e20071.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0020071
109. Pittau F,Grova C,Moeller F,Dubeau F,Gotman J. Patterns of altered functional
connectivity in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia (2012) 53:1013–23.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03464.x
110. Waites AB, Briellmann RS, Saling MM, Abbott DF, Jackson GD. Functional
connectivity networks are disrupted in left temporal lobe epilepsy. Ann Neurol
(2006) 59:335–43. doi:10.1002/ana.20733
111. Kobayashi E, Grova C, Tyvaert L, Dubeau F, Gotman J. Structures involved at
the time of temporal lobe spikes revealed by interindividual group analysis of
EEG/fMRI data. Epilepsia (2009) 50:2549–56. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.
02180.x
112. Frings L, Schulze-Bonhage A, Spreer J,Wagner K. Remote effects of hippocam-
pal damage on default network connectivity in the human brain. J Neurol
(2009) 256:2021–9. doi:10.1007/s00415-009-5233-0
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 16


--- 第 17 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
113. Liao W, Zhang Z, Pan Z, Mantini D, Ding J, Duan X, et al. Altered func-
tional connectivity and small-world in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. PLoS
One (2010) 5:e8525. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0008525
114. Liao W, Zhang Z, Pan Z, Mantini D, Ding J, Duan X, et al. Default mode
network abnormalities in mesial temporal lobe epilepsy: a study combin-
ing fMRI and DTI. Hum Brain Mapp (2011) 32:883–95. doi:10.1002/hbm.
21076
115. Zhang Z, Lu G, Zhong Y, Tan Q, Liao W, Wang Z, et al. Altered spontaneous
neuronalactivityof thedefault-modenetworkinmesialtemporallobeepilepsy.
Brain Res (2010) 1323:152–60. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2010.01.042
116. Haneef Z, Lenartowicz A, Yeh HJ, Engel J Jr, Stern JM. Effect of lateralized
temporal lobe epilepsy on the default mode network. Epilepsy Behav (2012)
25:350–7. doi:10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.07.019
117. Morgan VL, Sonmezturk HH, Gore JC, Abou-Khalil B. Lateralization of
temporal lobe epilepsy using resting functional magnetic resonance imag-
ing connectivity of hippocampal networks. Epilepsia (2012) 53:1628–35.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03590.x
118. McCormickC,QuraanM,CohnM,ValianteTA,McAndrewsMP.Defaultmode
network connectivity indicates episodic memory capacity in mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia (2013) 54:809–18. doi:10.1111/epi.12098
119. Andrews-Hanna JR, Reidler JS, Sepulcre J, Poulin R, Buckner RL. Functional-
anatomic fractionation of the brain’s default network. Neuron (2010)
65:550–62. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2010.02.005
120. Damoiseaux JS,Rombouts SA,Barkhof F,Scheltens P,Stam CJ,Smith SM,et al.
Consistent resting-state networks across healthy subjects. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A (2006) 103:13848–53. doi:10.1073/pnas.0601417103
121. Fransson P, Marrelec G. The precuneus/posterior cingulate cortex plays a piv-
otal role in the default mode network: evidence from a partial correlation
network analysis. Neuroimage (2008) 42:1178–84. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2008.05.059
122. Yeo BT, Krienen FM, Chee MW, Buckner RL. Estimates of segregation and
overlap of functional connectivity networks in the human cerebral cortex.
Neuroimage (2013) 88C:212–27. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.10.046
123. Heimer L, Alheid GF, De Olmos JS, Groenewegen HJ, Haber SN, Harlan RE,
et al. The accumbens: beyond the core-shell dichotomy. J Neuropsychiatry Clin
Neurosci (1997) 9:354–81.
124. Koob GF, Volkow ND. Neurocircuitry of addiction. Neuropsychopharmacology
(2010) 35:217–38. doi:10.1038/npp.2009.110
125. Bunzeck N, Doeller CF, Dolan RJ, Duzel E. Contextual interaction between
novelty and reward processing within the mesolimbic system. Hum Brain Mapp
(2012) 33:1309–24. doi:10.1002/hbm.21288
126. Lieb JP, Dasheiff RM, Engel J Jr. Role of the frontal lobes in the propagation of
mesial temporal lobe seizures. Epilepsia (1991) 32:822–37. doi:10.1111/j.1528-
1157.1991.tb05539.x
127. Yadid G, Friedman A. Dynamics of the dopaminergic system as a key compo-
nent to the understanding of depression. Prog Brain Res (2008) 172:265–86.
doi:10.1016/S0079-6123(08)00913-8
128. Price JL, Drevets WC. Neurocircuitry of mood disorders. Neuropsychopharma-
cology (2010) 35:192–216. doi:10.1038/npp.2009.104
129. Chen S, Wu X, Lui S, Wu Q, Yao Z, Li Q, et al. Resting-state fMRI study of
treatment-naive temporal lobe epilepsy patients with depressive symptoms.
Neuroimage (2012) 60:299–304. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.11.092
130. Butler T, Blackmon K, McDonald CR, Carlson C, Barr WB, Devinsky O, et al.
Cortical thickness abnormalities associated with depressive symptoms in tem-
poral lobe epilepsy. Epilepsy Behav (2012) 23:64–7. doi:10.1016/j.yebeh.2011.
10.001
131. Stretton J, Pope RA, Winston GP, Sidhu MK, Symms M, Duncan JS, et al.
Temporal lobe epilepsy and affective disorders: the role of the subgenual ante-
rior cingulate cortex. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry (2014). doi:10.1136/jnnp-
2013-306966
132. Meletti S, Benuzzi F, Rubboli G, Cantalupo G, Stanzani Maserati M,
Nichelli P, et al. Impaired facial emotion recognition in early-onset right
mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurology (2003) 60:426–31. doi:10.1212/WNL.
60.3.426
133. Schacher M, Winkler R, Grunwald T, Kraemer G, Kurthen M, Reed V, et al.
Mesial temporal lobe epilepsy impairs advanced social cognition. Epilepsia
(2006) 47:2141–6. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00857.x
134. Hlobil U, Rathore C, Alexander A, Sarma S, Radhakrishnan K. Impaired facial
emotion recognition in patients with mesial temporal lobe epilepsy associated
with hippocampal sclerosis (MTLE-HS): side and age at onset matters. Epilepsy
Res (2008) 80:150–7. doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2008.03.018
135. Meletti S, Benuzzi F, Cantalupo G, Rubboli G, Tassinari CA, Nichelli P. Facial
emotion recognition impairment in chronic temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia
(2009) 50:1547–59. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01978.x
136. Broicher SD, Frings L, Huppertz HJ, Grunwald T, Kurthen M, Kramer G, et al.
Alterations in functional connectivity of the amygdala in unilateral mesial tem-
poral lobe epilepsy. J Neurol (2012) 259:2546–54. doi:10.1007/s00415-012-
6533-3
137. Bonelli SB, Powell R, Yogarajah M, Thompson PJ, Symms MR, Koepp MJ,
et al. Preoperative amygdala fMRI in temporal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia (2009)
50:217–27. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01739.x
138. Cataldi M, Avoli M, De Villers-Sidani E. Resting state networks in temporal
lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia (2013) 54:2048–59. doi:10.1111/epi.12400
139. Negishi M, Martuzzi R, Novotny EJ, Spencer DD, Constable RT. Functional
MRI connectivity as a predictor of the surgical outcome of epilepsy. Epilepsia
(2011) 52:1733–40. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2011.03191.x
140. Luo C, An D, Yao D, Gotman J. Patient-speciﬁc connectivity pattern of
epileptic network in frontal lobe epilepsy. Neuroimage Clin (2014) 4:668–75.
doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2014.04.006
141. Centeno M, Vollmar C, O’Muircheartaigh J, Stretton J, Bonelli SB, Symms
MR, et al. Memory in frontal lobe epilepsy: an fMRI study. Epilepsia (2012)
53:1756–64. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03570.x
142. Meeren H, Van Luijtelaar G, Da Silva F, Coenen A. Evolving concepts on the
pathophysiology of absence seizures: the cortical focus theory. Arch Neurol
(2005) 62:371–6. doi:10.1001/archneur.62.3.371
143. Blumenfeld H. Cellular and network mechanisms of spike-wave seizures.
Epilepsia (2005) 46(Suppl 9):21–33. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2005.00311.x
144. Gloor P. Generalized cortico-reticular epilepsies. Some considerations on
the pathophysiology of generalized bilaterally synchronous spike and
wave discharge. Epilepsia (1968) 9:249–63. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1157.1968.
tb04624.x
145. Meeren HK, Pijn JP, Van Luijtelaar EL, Coenen AM, Da Silva FH. Cortical
focus drives widespread corticothalamic networks during spontaneous absence
seizures in rats. J Neurosci (2002) 22:1480–95.
146. Manning JP, Richards DA, Leresche N, Crunelli V, Bowery NG. Cortical-area
speciﬁcblockof geneticallydeterminedabsenceseizuresbyethosuximide.Neu-
roscience (2004) 123:5–9. doi:10.1016/j.neuroscience.2003.09.026
147. Polack PO, Guillemain I, Hu E, Deransart C, Depaulis A, Charpier S. Deep
layer somatosensory cortical neurons initiate spike-and-wave discharges in a
genetic model of absence seizures. J Neurosci (2007) 27:6590–9. doi:10.1523/
JNEUROSCI.0753-07.2007
148. Archer JS, Abbott DF, Waites AB, Jackson GD. fMRI “deactivation” of the
posterior cingulate during generalized spike and wave. Neuroimage (2003)
20:1915–22. doi:10.1016/S1053-8119(03)00294-5
149. Aghakhani Y, Bagshaw AP, Benar CG, Hawco C, Andermann F, Dubeau F, et al.
fMRI activation during spike and wave discharges in idiopathic generalized
epilepsy. Brain (2004) 127:1127–44. doi:10.1093/brain/awh136
150. Masterton RA, Carney PW, Abbott DF, Jackson GD. Absence epilepsy subnet-
works revealed by event-related independent components analysis of func-
tional magnetic resonance imaging. Epilepsia (2013) 54:801–8. doi:10.1111/
epi.12163
151. Salek-Haddadi A, Lemieux L, Merschhemke M, Friston KJ, Duncan JS, Fish
DR. Functional magnetic resonance imaging of human absence seizures. Ann
Neurol (2003) 53:663–7. doi:10.1002/ana.10586
152. Labate A, Briellmann RS, Abbott DF, Waites AB, Jackson GD. Typical child-
hood absence seizures are associated with thalamic activation. Epileptic Disord
(2005) 7:373–7.
153. Laufs H, Lengler U, Hamandi K, Kleinschmidt A, Krakow K. Linking gen-
eralized spike-and-wave discharges and resting state brain activity by using
EEG/fMRI in a patient with absence seizures. Epilepsia (2006) 47:444–8.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00443.x
154. Moeller F,Siebner HR,Wolff S,Muhle H,Granert O,Jansen O,et al. Simultane-
ous EEG-fMRI in drug-naive children with newly diagnosed absence epilepsy.
Epilepsia (2008) 49:1510–9. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2008.01626.x
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 17


--- 第 18 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
155. Hamandi K, Salek-Haddadi A, Laufs H, Liston A, Friston K, Fish DR, et al.
EEG-fMRI of idiopathic and secondarily generalized epilepsies. Neuroimage
(2006) 31:1700–10. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.02.016
156. Child ND, Benarroch EE. Anterior nucleus of the thalamus: functional orga-
nization and clinical implications. Neurology (2013) 81:1869–76. doi:10.1212/
01.wnl.0000436078.95856.56
157. Carney PW, Masterton RA, Harvey AS, Scheffer IE, Berkovic SF, Jackson
GD. The core network in absence epilepsy. Differences in cortical and
thalamic BOLD response. Neurology (2010) 75:904–11. doi:10.1212/WNL.
0b013e3181f11c06
158. Westmijse I, Ossenblok P, Gunning B,Van Luijtelaar G. Onset and propagation
of spike and slow wave discharges in human absence epilepsy: a MEG study.
Epilepsia (2009) 50:2538–48. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2009.02162.x
159. Roche-Labarbe N, Zaaimi B, Berquin P, Nehlig A, Grebe R, Wallois F. NIRS-
measured oxy- and deoxyhemoglobin changes associated with EEG spike-and-
wave discharges in children. Epilepsia (2008) 49:1871–80. doi:10.1111/j.1528-
1167.2008.01711.x
160. Seneviratne U, Cook M, D’Souza W. Focal abnormalities in idiopathic gener-
alized epilepsy: a critical review of the literature. Epilepsia (2014) 55:1157–69.
doi:10.1111/epi.12688
161. Tyvaert L, Chassagnon S, Sadikot A, Levan P, Dubeau F, Gotman J. Thalamic
nuclei activity in idiopathic generalized epilepsy: an EEG-fMRI study. Neurol-
ogy (2009) 73:2018–22. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c55d02
162. Wang Z, Lu G, Zhang Z, Zhong Y, Jiao Q, Tan Q, et al. Altered resting state
networks in epileptic patients with generalized tonic-clonic seizures. Brain Res
(2011) 1374:134–41. doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2010.12.034
163. McGill ML, Devinsky O, Kelly C, Milham M, Castellanos FX, Quinn BT,
et al. Default mode network abnormalities in idiopathic generalized epilepsy.
Epilepsy Behav (2012) 23:353–9. doi:10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.01.013
164. Zhang Z, Liao W, Chen H, Mantini D, Ding JR, Xu Q, et al. Altered functional-
structural coupling of large-scale brain networks in idiopathic generalized
epilepsy. Brain (2011) 134:2912–28. doi:10.1093/brain/awr223
165. Maneshi M, Moeller F, Fahoum F, Gotman J, Grova C. Resting-state connectiv-
ity of the sustained attention network correlates with disease duration in idio-
pathic generalized epilepsy. PLoS One (2012) 7:e50359. doi:10.1371/journal.
pone.0050359
166. Kay BP, Difrancesco MW, Privitera MD, Gotman J, Holland SK, Szaﬂarski
JP. Reduced default mode network connectivity in treatment-resistant
idiopathic generalized epilepsy. Epilepsia (2013) 54:461–70. doi:10.1111/epi.
12057
167. Kim JB, Suh SI, Seo WK, Oh K, Koh SB, Kim JH. Altered thalamocortical
functional connectivity in idiopathic generalized epilepsy. Epilepsia (2014)
55:592–600. doi:10.1111/epi.12580
168. Vollmar C, O’Muircheartaigh J, Barker GJ, Symms MR, Thompson P, Kumari
V, et al. Motor system hyperconnectivity in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy: a cog-
nitive functional magnetic resonance imaging study. Brain (2011) 134:1710–9.
doi:10.1093/brain/awr098
169. Vulliemoz S, Vollmar C, Koepp MJ, Yogarajah M, O’Muircheartaigh J,
Carmichael DW, et al. Connectivity of the supplementary motor area in juve-
nile myoclonic epilepsy and frontal lobe epilepsy. Epilepsia (2011) 52:507–14.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02770.x
170. Vollmar C, O’Muircheartaigh J, Symms MR, Barker GJ, Thompson P,
Kumari V, et al. Altered microstructural connectivity in juvenile myoclonic
epilepsy: the missing link. Neurology (2012) 78:1555–9. doi:10.1212/WNL.
0b013e3182563b44
171. Wandschneider B, Centeno M, Vollmar C, Stretton J, O’Muircheartaigh J,
Thompson PJ, et al. Risk-taking behavior in juvenile myoclonic epilepsy.
Epilepsia (2013) 54:2158–65. doi:10.1111/epi.12413
172. Moeller F, Stephani U, Siniatchkin M. Simultaneous EEG and fMRI record-
ings (EEG-fMRI) in children with epilepsy. Epilepsia (2013) 54:971–82.
doi:10.1111/epi.12197
173. Siniatchkin M, Coropceanu D, Moeller F, Boor R, Stephani U. EEG-fMRI
reveals activation of brainstem and thalamus in patients with Lennox-
Gastaut syndrome. Epilepsia (2011) 52:766–74. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.
02948.x
174. Pillay N,Archer JS,Badawy RA,Flanagan DF,Berkovic SF,Jackson G. Networks
underlying paroxysmal fast activity and slow spike and wave in Lennox-Gastaut
syndrome. Neurology (2013) 81:665–73. doi:10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a08f6a
175. Archer JS, Warren AE, Stagnitti MR, Masterton RA, Abbott DF, Jackson
GD. Lennox-Gastaut syndrome and phenotype: secondary network epilepsies.
Epilepsia (2014) 55:1245–54. doi:10.1111/epi.12682
176. MoellerF,GroeningK,MoehringJ,MuhleH,Wolff S,JansenO,et al.EEG-fMRI
in myoclonic astaticepilepsy (Doose syndrome). Neurology (2014) 82:1508–13.
doi:10.1212/WNL.0000000000000359
177. Archer JS, Briellman RS, Abbott DF, Syngeniotis A, Wellard RM, Jackson
GD. Benign epilepsy with centro-temporal spikes: spike triggered fMRI shows
somato-sensory cortex activity. Epilepsia (2003) 44:200–4. doi:10.1046/j.1528-
1157.2003.02502.x
178. Boor S, Vucurevic G, Pﬂeiderer C, Stoeter P, Kutschke G, Boor R. EEG-related
functional MRI in benign childhood epilepsy with centrotemporal spikes.
Epilepsia (2003) 44:688–92. doi:10.1046/j.1528-1157.2003.27802.x
179. Lengler U, Kafadar I, Neubauer BA, Krakow K. fMRI correlates of interictal
epileptic activity in patients with idiopathic benign focal epilepsy of childhood.
A simultaneous EEG-functional MRI study. Epilepsy Res (2007) 75:29–38.
doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2007.03.016
180. Masterton RA, Harvey AS, Archer JS, Lillywhite LM, Abbott DF, Scheffer
IE, et al. Focal epileptiform spikes do not show a canonical BOLD response
in patients with benign rolandic epilepsy (BECTS). Neuroimage (2010)
51:252–60. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.01.109
181. Siniatchkin M, Groening K, Moehring J, Moeller F, Boor R, Brodbeck V, et al.
Neuronal networks in children with continuous spikes and waves during slow
sleep. Brain (2010) 133:2798–813. doi:10.1093/brain/awq183
182. Mirandola L, Cantalupo G, Vaudano AE, Avanzini P, Ruggieri A, Pisani F, et al.
Centrotemporal spikes during NREM sleep: the promoting action of thalamus
revealed by simultaneous EEG and fMRI coregistration. Epilepsy Behav Case
Rep (2013) 1:106–9. doi:10.1016/j.ebcr.2013.06.005
183. Moeller F,Moehring J,Ick I,Steinmann E,Wolff S,Jansen O,et al. EEG-fMRI in
atypical benign partial epilepsy. Epilepsia (2013) 54:e103–8. doi:10.1111/epi.
12243
184. Vaudano AE, Ruggieri A, Vignoli A, Avanzini P, Benuzzi F, Gessaroli G, et al.
Epilepsy-related brain networks in ring chromosome 20 syndrome: an EEG-
fMRI study. Epilepsia (2014) 55:403–13. doi:10.1111/epi.12539
185. Bartolomei F, Chauvel P, Wendling F. Epileptogenicity of brain structures in
human temporal lobe epilepsy: a quantiﬁed study from intracerebral EEG.
Brain (2008) 131:1818–30. doi:10.1093/brain/awn111
186. Bartolomei F, Cosandier-Rimele D, McGonigal A, Aubert S, Regis J, Gavaret
M, et al. From mesial temporal lobe to temporoperisylvian seizures: a quan-
tiﬁed study of temporal lobe seizure networks. Epilepsia (2010) 51:2147–58.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02690.x
187. Arthuis M,Valton L, Regis J, Chauvel P,Wendling F, Naccache L, et al. Impaired
consciousness during temporal lobe seizures is related to increased long-
distance cortical-subcortical synchronization. Brain (2009) 132:2091–101.
doi:10.1093/brain/awp086
188. Lambert I, Arthuis M, McGonigal A, Wendling F, Bartolomei F. Alteration of
global workspace during loss of consciousness: a study of parietal seizures.
Epilepsia (2012) 53:2104–10. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03690.x
189. Bartolomei F, McGonigal A, Naccache L. Alteration of consciousness in
focal epilepsy: the global workspace alteration theory. Epilepsy Behav (2014)
30:17–23. doi:10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.09.012
190. Blumenfeld H, McNally KA, Vanderhill SD, Paige AL, Chung R, Davis K, et al.
Positive and negative network correlations in temporal lobe epilepsy. Cereb
Cortex (2004) 14:892–902. doi:10.1093/cercor/bhh048
191. Englot DJ, Yang L, Hamid H, Danielson N, Bai X, Marfeo A, et al. Impaired
consciousness in temporal lobe seizures: role of cortical slow activity. Brain
(2010) 133:3764–77. doi:10.1093/brain/awq316
192. Englot DJ, Modi B, Mishra AM, Desalvo M, Hyder F, Blumenfeld H. Cortical
deactivation induced by subcortical network dysfunction in limbic seizures.
J Neurosci (2009) 29:13006–18. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.3846-09.2009
193. Blumenfeld H. Impaired consciousness in epilepsy. Lancet Neurol (2012)
11:814–26. doi:10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70188-6
194. Rubinov M, Sporns O. Complex network measures of brain connectiv-
ity: uses and interpretations. Neuroimage (2010) 52:1059–69. doi:10.1016/j.
neuroimage.2009.10.003
195. Wilke C, Worrell G, He B. Graph analysis of epileptogenic networks in
human partial epilepsy. Epilepsia (2011) 52:84–93. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.
2010.02785.x
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 18


--- 第 19 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
196. Van Mierlo P, Carrette E, Hallez H, Raedt R, Meurs A, Vandenberghe S,
et al. Ictal-onset localization through connectivity analysis of intracranial
EEG signals in patients with refractory epilepsy. Epilepsia (2013) 54:1409–18.
doi:10.1111/epi.12206
197. Panzica F, Varotto G, Rotondi F, Spreaﬁco R, Franceschetti S. Identiﬁcation of
the epileptogenic zone from stereo-EEG signals: a connectivity-graph theory
approach. Front Neurol (2013) 4:175. doi:10.3389/fneur.2013.00175
198. Vulliemoz S, Carmichael DW, Rosenkranz K, Diehl B, Rodionov R, Walker
MC, et al. Simultaneous intracranial EEG and fMRI of interictal epileptic dis-
charges in humans. Neuroimage (2011) 54:182–90. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2010.08.004
199. Carmichael DW,Vulliemoz S, Rodionov R, Thornton JS, McEvoy AW, Lemieux
L. Simultaneous intracranial EEG-fMRI in humans: protocol considerations
anddataquality.Neuroimage (2012)63:301–9.doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.
05.056
200. Schevon CA, Weiss SA, McKhann G Jr, Goodman RR, Yuste R, Emerson RG,
et al. Evidence of an inhibitory restraint of seizure activity in humans. Nat
Commun (2012) 3:1060. doi:10.1038/ncomms2056
201. Weiss SA, Banks GP, McKhann GM Jr, Goodman RR, Emerson RG,
Trevelyan AJ, et al. Ictal high frequency oscillations distinguish two types of
seizure territories in humans. Brain (2013) 136:3796–808. doi:10.1093/brain/
awt276
202. Penﬁeld W, Boldrey E. Somatic motor and sensory representation in the
cerebral cortex of man as studied by electrical stimulation. Brain (1937)
60:389–443. doi:10.1093/brain/60.4.389
203. Hamberger MJ. Cortical language mapping in epilepsy: a critical review. Neu-
ropsychol Rev (2007) 17:477–89. doi:10.1007/s11065-007-9046-6
204. Selimbeyoglu A, Parvizi J. Electrical stimulation of the human brain: percep-
tual and behavioral phenomena reported in the old and new literature. Front
Hum Neurosci (2010) 4:46. doi:10.3389/fnhum.2010.00046
205. Megevand P,Groppe DM,Goldﬁnger MS,Hwang ST,Kingsley PB,Davidesco I,
et al.Seeingscenes:topographicvisualhallucinationsevokedbydirectelectrical
stimulation of the parahippocampal place area. J Neurosci (2014) 34:5399–405.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5202-13.2014
206. Parvizi J, Rangarajan V, Shirer WR, Desai N, Greicius MD. The will to persevere
induced by electrical stimulation of the human cingulate gyrus. Neuron (2013)
80:1359–67. doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2013.10.057
207. Matsumoto R, Nair DR, Lapresto E, Najm I, Bingaman W, Shibasaki H, et al.
Functional connectivity in the human language system: a cortico-cortical
evoked potential study. Brain (2004) 127:2316–30. doi:10.1093/brain/awh246
208. Conner CR, Ellmore TM, Disano MA, Pieters TA, Potter AW, Tandon N.
Anatomic and electro-physiologic connectivity of the language system: a com-
bined DTI-CCEP study. Comput Biol Med (2011) 41:1100–9. doi:10.1016/j.
compbiomed.2011.07.008
209. David O, Bastin J, Chabardes S, Minotti L, Kahane P. Studying network mech-
anisms using intracranial stimulation in epileptic patients. Front Syst Neurosci
(2010) 4:148. doi:10.3389/fnsys.2010.00148
210. Wilson CL, Isokawa M, Babb TL, Crandall PH. Functional connections in
the human temporal lobe. I. analysis of limbic system pathways using neu-
ronal responses evoked by electrical stimulation. Exp Brain Res (1990) 82:
279–92.
211. Lacruz ME,Garcia Seoane JJ,Valentin A,Selway R,Alarcon G. Frontal and tem-
poral functional connections of the living human brain. Eur J Neurosci (2007)
26:1357–70. doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2007.05730.x
212. Gloor P, Salanova V, Olivier A, Quesney LF. The human dorsal hippocam-
pal commissure. An anatomically identiﬁable and functional pathway. Brain
(1993) 116(Pt 5):1249–73. doi:10.1093/brain/116.5.1249
213. David O, Job AS, De Palma L, Hoffmann D, Minotti L, Kahane P. Probabilistic
functional tractography of the human cortex. Neuroimage (2013) 80:307–17.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.075
214. Iwasaki M, Enatsu R, Matsumoto R, Novak E, Thankappen B, Piao Z,
et al. Accentuated cortico-cortical evoked potentials in neocortical epilepsy in
areas of ictal onset. Epileptic Disord (2010) 12:292–302. doi:10.1684/epd.2010.
0334
215. Valentin A, Anderson M, Alarcon G, Seoane JJ, Selway R, Binnie CD,
et al. Responses to single pulse electrical stimulation identify epileptogenesis
in the human brain in vivo. Brain (2002) 125:1709–18. doi:10.1093/brain/
awf187
216. Enatsu R, Jin K, Elwan S, Kubota Y, Piao Z, O’Connor T, et al. Correla-
tions between ictal propagation and response to electrical cortical stimulation:
a cortico-cortical evoked potential study. Epilepsy Res (2012) 101:76–87.
doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2012.03.004
217. Berenyi A, Belluscio M, Mao D, Buzsaki G. Closed-loop control of epilepsy
by transcranial electrical stimulation. Science (2012) 337:735–7. doi:10.1126/
science.1223154
218. Buckmaster PS. Laboratory animal models of temporal lobe epilepsy. Comp
Med (2004) 54:473–85.
219. Mishra AM, Bai H, Gribizis A, Blumenfeld H. Neuroimaging biomarkers of
epileptogenesis. Neurosci Lett (2011) 497:194–204. doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2011.
01.076
220. Coppola A, Moshe SL. Animal models. Handb Clin Neurol (2012) 107:63–98.
doi:10.1016/B978-0-444-52898-8.00004-5
221. Guillemain I, Kahane P, Depaulis A. Animal models to study aetiopathology
of epilepsy: what are the features to model? Epileptic Disord (2012) 14:217–25.
doi:10.1684/epd.2012.0528
222. Galanopoulou AS. Basic mechanisms of catastrophic epilepsy – overview
from animal models. Brain Dev (2013) 35:748–56. doi:10.1016/j.braindev.
2012.12.005
223. Cossart R, Dinocourt C, Hirsch JC, Merchan-Perez A, De Felipe J, Ben-Ari Y,
et al. Dendritic but not somatic GABAergic inhibition is decreased in experi-
mental epilepsy. Nat Neurosci (2001) 4:52–62. doi:10.1038/82900
224. Soussi R, Boulland JL, Bassot E, Bras H, Coulon P, Chaudhry FA, et al. Reor-
ganization of supramammillary-hippocampal pathways in the rat pilocarpine
model of temporal lobe epilepsy: evidence for axon terminal sprouting. Brain
Struct Funct (2014). doi:10.1007/s00429-014-0800-2
225. Mishra AM, Ellens DJ, Schridde U, Motelow JE, Purcaro MJ, Desalvo MN,
et al. Where fMRI and electrophysiology agree to disagree: corticothalamic and
striatal activity patterns in the WAG/Rij rat. J Neurosci (2011) 31:15053–64.
doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0101-11.2011
226. Elms J, Powell KL, Van Raay L, Dedeurwaerdere S, O’Brien TJ, Morris MJ.
Long-term valproate treatment increases brain neuropeptide Y expression and
decreases seizure expression in a genetic rat model of absence epilepsy. PLoS
One (2013) 8:e73505. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0073505
227. Carcak N, Zheng T, Ali I, Abdullah A, French C, Powell KL, et al. The effect of
amygdala kindling on neuronal ﬁring patterns in the lateral thalamus in the
GAERS model of absence epilepsy. Epilepsia (2014) 55:654–65. doi:10.1111/
epi.12592
228. Bouilleret V, Ridoux V, Depaulis A, Marescaux C, Nehlig A, La Salle G. Recur-
rent seizures and hippocampal sclerosis following intrahippocampal kainate
injection in adult mice: electroencephalography, histopathology and synaptic
reorganization similar to mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. Neuroscience (1999)
89:717–29. doi:10.1016/S0306-4522(98)00401-1
229. Leite JP, Garcia-Cairasco N, Cavalheiro EA. New insights from the use of
pilocarpine and kainate models. Epilepsy Res (2002) 50:93–103. doi:10.1016/
S0920-1211(02)00072-4
230. Riban V, Bouilleret V, Pham-Le BT, Fritschy JM, Marescaux C, Depaulis A.
Evolution of hippocampal epileptic activity during the development of hip-
pocampal sclerosis in a mouse model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Neuroscience
(2002) 112:101–11. doi:10.1016/S0306-4522(02)00064-7
231. Marchi N, Oby E, Batra A, Uva L, De Curtis M, Hernandez N, et al. In vivo
and in vitro effects of pilocarpine: relevance to ictogenesis. Epilepsia (2007)
48:1934–46. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2007.01185.x
232. Curia G, Longo D, Biagini G, Jones RS, Avoli M. The pilocarpine model of
temporal lobe epilepsy. J Neurosci Methods (2008) 172:143–57. doi:10.1016/j.
jneumeth.2008.04.019
233. Deprez F, Zattoni M, Mura ML, Frei K, Fritschy JM. Adoptive transfer of T
lymphocytes in immunodeﬁcient mice inﬂuences epileptogenesis and neu-
rodegeneration in a model of temporal lobe epilepsy. Neurobiol Dis (2011)
44:174–84. doi:10.1016/j.nbd.2011.06.011
234. Zattoni M, Mura ML, Deprez F, Schwendener RA, Engelhardt B, Frei K, et al.
Brain inﬁltration of leukocytes contributes to the pathophysiology of temporal
lobe epilepsy. J Neurosci (2011) 31:4037–50. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6210-
10.2011
235. Lothman EW, Hatlelid JM, Zorumski CF, Conry JA, Moon PF, Perlin JB. Kin-
dlingwithrapidlyrecurringhippocampalseizures.BrainRes (1985)360:83–91.
doi:10.1016/0006-8993(85)91223-5
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 19


--- 第 20 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
236. Morales JC, Alvarez-Ferradas C, Roncagliolo M, Fuenzalida M, Wellmann
M, Nualart FJ, et al. A new rapid kindling variant for induction of corti-
cal epileptogenesis in freely moving rats. Front Cell Neurosci (2014) 8:200.
doi:10.3389/fncel.2014.00200
237. Kowski AB, Kanaan H, Schmitt FC, Holtkamp M. Deep hypothermia termi-
nates status epilepticus – an experimental study. Brain Res (2012) 1446:119–26.
doi:10.1016/j.brainres.2012.01.022
238. Reddy DS, Kuruba R. Experimental models of status epilepticus and neu-
ronal injury for evaluation of therapeutic interventions. Int J Mol Sci (2013)
14:18284–318. doi:10.3390/ijms140918284
239. Wang CH, Hung CP, Chen MT, Shih YH, Lin YY. Hippocampal desynchro-
nization of functional connectivity prior to the onset of status epilepticus in
pilocarpine-treated rats. PLoS One (2012) 7:e39763. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0039763
240. Gong XW, Li JB, Lu QC, Liang PJ, Zhang PM. Effective connectivity of hip-
pocampal neural network and its alteration in Mg2+-free epilepsy model. PLoS
One (2014) 9:e92961. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0092961
241. Cymerblit-SabbaA,SchillerY. Network dynamics during development of phar-
macologically induced epileptic seizures in rats in vivo. J Neurosci (2010)
30:1619–30. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5078-09.2010
242. Englot DJ, Mishra AM, Mansuripur PK, Herman P, Hyder F, Blumenfeld H.
Remote effects of focal hippocampal seizures on the rat neocortex. J Neurosci
(2008) 28:9066–81. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2014-08.2008
243. Megevand P, Quairiaux C, Lascano AM, Kiss JZ, Michel CM. A mouse
model for studying large-scale neuronal networks using EEG mapping
techniques. Neuroimage (2008) 42:591–602. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.
05.016
244. Megevand P, Troncoso E, Quairiaux C, Muller D, Michel CM, Kiss JZ.
Long-term plasticity in mouse sensorimotor circuits after rhythmic whisker
stimulation. J Neurosci (2009) 29:5326–35. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5965-08.
2009
245. Quairiaux C, Sizonenko SV, Megevand P, Michel CM, Kiss JZ. Functional
deﬁcit and recovery of developing sensorimotor networks following neona-
tal hypoxic-ischemic injury in the rat. Cereb Cortex (2010) 20:2080–91.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhp281
246. Quairiaux C, Megevand P, Kiss JZ, Michel CM. Functional development of
large-scale sensorimotor cortical networks in the brain. J Neurosci (2011)
31:9574–84. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5995-10.2011
247. Toyoda I, Bower MR, Leyva F, Buckmaster PS. Early activation of ventral hip-
pocampus and subiculum during spontaneous seizures in a rat model of tem-
poral lobe epilepsy. J Neurosci (2013) 33:11100–15. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.
0472-13.2013
248. Berenyi A, Somogyvari Z, Nagy AJ, Roux L, Long JD, Fujisawa S, et al.
Large-scale, high-density (up to 512 channels) recording of local circuits in
behaving animals. J Neurophysiol (2014) 111:1132–49. doi:10.1152/jn.00785.
2013
249. Mishra AM, Bai X, Sanganahalli BG, Waxman SG, Shatillo O, Grohn O, et al.
Decreased resting functional connectivity after traumatic brain injury in the
rat. PLoS One (2014) 9:e95280. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0095280
250. Mishra AM, Bai X, Motelow JE, Desalvo MN, Danielson N, Sanganahalli
BG, et al. Increased resting functional connectivity in spike-wave epilepsy in
WAG/Rij rats. Epilepsia (2013) 54:1214–22. doi:10.1111/epi.12227
251. Choi H,KimYK,Kang H,Lee H,Im HJ,Hwang DW,et al. Abnormal metabolic
connectivity in the pilocarpine-induced epilepsy rat model: a multiscale net-
work analysis based on persistent homology. Neuroimage (2014) 99C:226–36.
doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.039
252. Xia Y, Lai Y, Lei L, Liu Y, Yao D. Left hemisphere predominance of pilocarpine-
induced rat epileptiform discharges. J Neuroeng Rehabil (2009) 6:42. doi:10.
1186/1743-0003-6-42
253. Zhou IY, Liang YX, Chan RW, Gao PP, Cheng JS, Hu Y, et al. Brain resting-
state functional MRI connectivity: morphological foundation and plasticity.
Neuroimage (2014) 84:1–10. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.08.037
254. Tenney JR, Duong TQ, King JA, Ludwig R, Ferris CF. Corticothalamic modu-
lation during absence seizures in rats: a functional MRI assessment. Epilepsia
(2003) 44:1133–40. doi:10.1046/j.1528-1157.2003.61002.x
255. Chahboune H, Mishra AM, Desalvo MN, Staib LH, Purcaro M, Scheinost
D, et al. DTI abnormalities in anterior corpus callosum of rats with spike-
wave epilepsy. Neuroimage (2009) 47:459–66. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.
04.060
256. Nersesyan H, Herman P, Erdogan E, Hyder F, Blumenfeld H. Relative changes
in cerebral blood ﬂow and neuronal activity in local microdomains during gen-
eralized seizures. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2004) 24:1057–68. doi:10.1097/
01.WCB.0000131669.02027.3E
257. Nersesyan H, Hyder F, Rothman DL, Blumenfeld H. Dynamic fMRI and EEG
recordings during spike-wave seizures and generalized tonic-clonic seizures in
WAG/Rij rats. J Cereb Blood Flow Metab (2004) 24:589–99. doi:10.1097/01.
WCB.0000117688.98763.23
258. Desalvo MN, Schridde U, Mishra AM, Motelow JE, Purcaro MJ, Daniel-
son N, et al. Focal BOLD fMRI changes in bicuculline-induced tonic-clonic
seizures in the rat. Neuroimage (2010) 50:902–9. doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.
2010.01.006
259. Polack PO, Mahon S, Chavez M, Charpier S. Inactivation of the somatosensory
cortex prevents paroxysmal oscillations in cortical and related thalamic neu-
rons in a genetic model of absence epilepsy. Cereb Cortex (2009) 19:2078–91.
doi:10.1093/cercor/bhn237
260. Straessle A, Loup F, Arabadzisz D, Ohning GV, Fritschy JM. Rapid and long-
term alterations of hippocampal GABAB receptors in a mouse model of tempo-
ral lobe epilepsy. Eur J Neurosci (2003) 18:2213–26. doi:10.1046/j.1460-9568.
2003.02964.x
261. Timofeev I, Bazhenov M, Avramescu S, Nita DA. Posttraumatic epilepsy:
the roles of synaptic plasticity. Neuroscientist (2010) 16:19–27. doi:10.1177/
1073858409333545
262. Pitkanen A, Kemppainen S, Ndode-Ekane XE, Huusko N, Huttunen JK, Grohn
O, et al. Posttraumatic epilepsy – disease or comorbidity? Epilepsy Behav
(2014). doi:10.1016/j.yebeh.2014.01.013
263. Zhang Q, Wu ZC, Yu JT, Zhong XL, Xing YY, Tian Y, et al. Anticonvul-
sant effect of unilateral anterior thalamic high frequency electrical stimula-
tion on amygdala-kindled seizures in rat. Brain Res Bull (2012) 87:221–6.
doi:10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.11.023
264. Langlois M, Polack PO, Bernard H, David O, Charpier S, Depaulis A,
et al. Involvement of the thalamic parafascicular nucleus in mesial temporal
lobe epilepsy. J Neurosci (2010) 30:16523–35. doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1109-
10.2010
265. Arabadzisz D, Antal K, Parpan F, Emri Z, Fritschy JM. Epileptogenesis and
chronic seizures in a mouse model of temporal lobe epilepsy are associ-
ated with distinct EEG patterns and selective neurochemical alterations in
the contralateral hippocampus. Exp Neurol (2005) 194:76–90. doi:10.1016/j.
expneurol.2005.01.029
266. Marx M, Haas CA, Haussler U. Differential vulnerability of interneurons in the
epileptic hippocampus. Front Cell Neurosci (2013) 7:167. doi:10.3389/fncel.
2013.00167
267. Khalilov I, Holmes GL, Ben-Ari Y. In vitro formation of a secondary epilepto-
genic mirror focus by interhippocampal propagation of seizures. Nat Neurosci
(2003) 6:1079–85. doi:10.1038/nn1125
268. Morrell F. Experimental focal epilepsy in animals. Arch Neurol (1959) 1:141–7.
doi:10.1001/archneur.1959.03840020015003
269. Ben-Ari Y, Lagowska J, Tremblay E, La Salle G. A new model of focal sta-
tus epilepticus: intra-amygdaloid application of kainic acid elicits repeti-
tive secondarily generalized convulsive seizures. Brain Res (1979) 163:176–9.
doi:10.1016/0006-8993(79)90163-X
270. Sobayo T, Mogul DJ. Rapid onset of a kainate-induced mirror focus in rat hip-
pocampus is mediated by contralateral AMPA receptors. Epilepsy Res (2013)
106:35–46. doi:10.1016/j.eplepsyres.2013.03.010
271. Sabatino M,Gravante G,Ferraro G,Vella N,La Grutta G,La GruttaV. Striatoni-
gralsuppressionof focalhippocampalepilepsy.NeurosciLett (1989)98:285–90.
doi:10.1016/0304-3940(89)90415-1
272. Rektor I, Kuba R, Brazdil M, Chrastina J. Do the basal ganglia inhibit
seizure activity in temporal lobe epilepsy? Epilepsy Behav (2012) 25:56–9.
doi:10.1016/j.yebeh.2012.04.125
273. Krook-Magnuson E, Armstrong C, Oijala M, Soltesz I. On-demand optoge-
netic control of spontaneous seizures in temporal lobe epilepsy. Nat Commun
(2013) 4:1376. doi:10.1038/ncomms2376
274. Paz JT,Davidson TJ,Frechette ES,Delord B,Parada I,Peng K,et al. Closed-loop
optogenetic control of thalamus as a tool for interrupting seizures after cortical
injury. Nat Neurosci (2013) 16:64–70. doi:10.1038/nn.3269
275. Mirski MA, Rossell LA, Terry JB, Fisher RS. Anticonvulsant effect of anterior
thalamic high frequency electrical stimulation in the rat. Epilepsy Res (1997)
28:89–100. doi:10.1016/S0920-1211(97)00034-X
Frontiers in Neurology | Epilepsy
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 20


--- 第 21 页 ---
Pittau et al.
Functional connectivity in epilepsy
276. HamaniC,EwertonFI,Bonilha SM,BallesterG,MelloLE,LozanoAM.Bilateral
anterior thalamic nucleus lesions and high-frequency stimulation are protec-
tive against pilocarpine-induced seizures and status epilepticus. Neurosurgery
(2004) 54:191–5. doi:10.1227/01.NEU.0000097552.31763.AE
277. Takebayashi S, Hashizume K, Tanaka T, Hodozuka A. The effect of elec-
trical stimulation and lesioning of the anterior thalamic nucleus on kainic
acid-induced focal cortical seizure status in rats. Epilepsia (2007) 48:348–58.
doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2006.00948.x
278. Lado FA. Chronic bilateral stimulation of the anterior thalamus of kainate-
treated rats increases seizure frequency. Epilepsia (2006) 47:27–32. doi:10.1111/
j.1528-1167.2006.00366.x
279. Fisher R, Salanova V, Witt T, Worth R, Henry T, Gross R, et al. Electrical stimu-
lation of the anterior nucleus of thalamus for treatment of refractory epilepsy.
Epilepsia (2010) 51:899–908. doi:10.1111/j.1528-1167.2010.02536.x
280. Jackson JH. Lectures on the diagnosis of epilepsy. Br Med J (1879) 1:33–6.
doi:10.1136/bmj.1.941.33
281. Jackson JH. Lectures on the diagnosis of epilepsy. Br Med J (1879) 1:141–3.
doi:10.1136/bmj.1.944.141
282. Jackson JH. Lectures on the diagnosis of epilepsy. Br Med J (1879) 1:109–12.
doi:10.1136/bmj.1.943.109
283. Sander JW. Comorbidity and premature mortality in epilepsy. Lancet (2013)
382:1618–9. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61136-8
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was conducted
in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed
as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Received: 18 July 2014; accepted: 08 October 2014; published online: 05 November
2014.
Citation: Pittau F, Mégevand P, Sheybani L, Abela E, Grouiller F, Spinelli L, Michel
CM, Seeck M and Vulliemoz S (2014) Mapping epileptic activity: sources or networks
for the clinicians? Front. Neurol. 5:218. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00218
This article was submitted to Epilepsy, a section of the journal Frontiers in Neurology.
Copyright © 2014 Pittau, Mégevand, Sheybani, Abela, Grouiller, Spinelli, Michel,
Seeck and Vulliemoz. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction
in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) or licensor are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
www.frontiersin.org
November 2014 | Volume 5 | Article 218 | 21
